The Dwarves of Ardainn
Mythical Beginnings
Church scholars believe the dwarven ancestors were crafted by the Divines as spirits in the immortal realm, the Ithirium, which crossed over to the mortal world as magic infused the mortal realm. Thus, like all the creations of the Divines, they were born of hubris; the Divines made themselves in the likeness of gods to the primitive Elves, and the magic they brough from the Ithirium infused the world with immortal spirits. But their early days were shared with the Elves, who taught them to survive the harsh realms they inhabited both above and below.
The dwarves settled in the far north of the world, at the rim of the utter Northern Wasteland, and farther yet than the Huor. They excelled at survival in such cold with their stocky physiques and abundance of hair to keep them warm. They resisted both heat and cold equally well and worked metals almost as well as the Elves. But they were unlike those dwarves who followed them – they lived above the land in warmer valleys, sheltering from the worst of winters, and they worked the seas as well as the tundra. Explorers today find evidence of long-houses partially dug into the frozen earth, in the same way the Huor do today on a larger scale. But even this adaptability to the extreme climate had its limits. A likely ice-age precipitated a migration further south, coming in all probability to occupy lands abandoned by the Elves following the Convergence and the Second Sin. But, like other races, the cascade of spirits both good and evil that spawned in the mortal realm following the Convergence had a profound impact on the dwarves. The Elves retreated behind their woodland veil, and the young races in warmer climes dealt with an influx of many small threats before they grew into grander ones. But in the north the spirits became creatures that lay dormant for centuries, learning slowly to use their great power. These were the dragons. The dwarrow could not face these mighty beasts above ground and so they dug deep chambers into the hills and mountains and hid there. And in the hiding they prospered.
Their storytellers talk of the rise of a leader, Odan the Pilgrim, and his kin who, as the dwarves defended their homes against foes great and small, decided to leave the north during this ice age. Odan led his people to the edges of the world we know today and settled in a mountainous region near modern Alkallund. There they traded with men and the Vallasaari who remained after the Sundering. The mountain rendered to the dwarves many rich metals to trade, and the dwarves’ resistance to the heat of the forge allowed them to craft beautiful artifacts. Trade was prosperous. The mountain hold grew into a city around the peak of Angaroth in the Emain Aechil range and took the name of the mountain for its own.
The Kin of Odan From Angaroth of the dwarves Odan sent his family to settle anew. In those days the dwarrow sailed the rivers and coasts as humans do now, and Odol the Sailor led his family to the Sea of Amund and the Crimson Sea beyond,
charting the coast and settling on both the northern and southern shores. They established trading hubs with the men of Calenor and the Othmael Isles, extending dwarven prosperity far beyond the hills of the north. Fedri the Way Finder took her kin west and south to the hills of Amund and established alliances with the Amundmen who worked those lands. They pressed on to the lands of Heath and west to Nessa and the Great Gray Sea. They brought the word of their lord Odan to the Halflings of Heath, the ancient forebears of the Huor, and the horsemen of The Hart, and proved loyal allies to all in times of peril. Odan’s eldest son Ingrod the Surefooted took his people east, forgoing the land to seek paths through the roots of the world and the mountain deeps. He followed the tales of great power in the east, and eventually came to the mountains that ringed Ilantha. Despite warnings from the Vallasaari who dwelt in the lands below, Ingrod settled a rich mining hold he named Gwathur at the eastern edge of the Emainn Estir, overlooking the Ilantha Forests.
The first thing to note, as a modern scholar, is that it seems doubtful these ancestors took such long journeys. Dwarves are long-lived but short-limbed and short-tempered; it seems more likely that such a migration occurred over many decades or even centuries by many successive dwarrow lords. But we must respect the dwarven priests who pass this story on in good faith, such is the delicate nature of their historical record at this time.
The Vallasaari were, during this age, still coming to understand the extent and depth of the decay that took hold of their great empire since the sundering. They looked with fear at a powerful and wealthy dwarf settlement so close to their sacred places and grew suspicious of Ingrod’s intent and what they saw as avarice. Relations remained cordial in times of peace. But the two would not remain in peace for long.
The Iron Throne In early days of Angaroth, an rock of pure iron was discovered that was so large a company of miners could sit atop it. The prodigious find was crafted into a solid throne, blessed, and worked with enchantments. Upon it was emblazoned the runes of the Dwarf lords who journeyed from the north with Odan the Pilgrim. It became the Iron Throne and upon it sat the Iron King. The throne was his symbol and the symbol of the dwarven holds across the north. Each settlement
' The kin of Awolt petition that your dignified master of the guild add our words to the records. It is our deepest desire that this be known : Massery Gault, The Lord of Ronaukhall has an ill-gotten confidence and has not the wit to encompass his many deficiencies.We say this in light of his lordship's actions after the Siege of Wronclaw Keep, whereupon the accused signalled to kinsman Pollof of Awolt that the door of the mead-vault was being held open. We note the normalcy of this act of kindness. BUT IT WAS DONE IN A PERVERSION OF SUCH KINDNESS. The door was opened from too long afar, so that kinsman Pollof must break his stride into a run, lest a slight be inferred from the slowness of his gait.
Whence kinsman Pollof was but ten dwarf paces from the door, he took note of a great guffaw from the Lord of Ronaukhall and mirth among his men at his exertions and thus they made remark on the length of his stride and redness of his countenance. This great injury was raised by kinsman Pollof. And yet, mark that the resolution was mere advice that my kinsman "Get theyself over it", and the cowardly "T'was but a jape".
The Awolt demand restitution of this debt of honour from the Lord of Ronaukhall or his successors, since it is known that Massery Gault II perished six-hundred years since.
was sent a councillor to advise in the name of the king, and each settlement returned two of their finest to serve with the King’s retinue, the Wâdergård, and one to sit upon his council of seers, the Wâdhesråd. The Wâdergård each became warriors of legend and themselves attained lordships, and the Iron King would send them on his most important missions, often accompanying the clerical Wâdhesråd as his agents so that the King could speak from afar through them. Under these advisors the rulership of the realm was kept stable, if not always easily, and the Dwarven kingdom prospered.
The first ruler of Angaroth was Olin the Lawgiver, who presided over a people now secure at last from their great foes in the north. But of course, no kingdom is without threat, and it was not only the dwarven lords who came south when the dragons awoke.
The Ancestor Stones
Since the earliest days of the dwarven people, they had an affinity for working the earth and working stone. Sages theorise that the spirits that became dwarves lingered beneath the world too long before coming into the light. But stone has not simply been a part of their mythology or their crafts, it was the foundation of the dwarven practice of ancestor worship.
When dwarves died, it was not the end of their ability to influence the world. They could be communed with through rituals performed by the priesthood long after their deaths, so long as the stone of their underground homes was used as the focus of these rituals. Ancient
priests recounted how tribal elders who passed away would be interred in stone tombs, and valuable gems placed in the sarcophagus lids. These gems allowed the priests and others to speak directly to the dead, seek advice, and receive the wisdom of generations of dwarven ancestors.
Over time, only the grandest of lords were afforded such tombs, and the practice of ancestor worship became widespread so that most families could commune with an elder. The greatest ambition of a dwarf was to be worthy of such an honour in his life that their soul would be interred in an Ancestor Stone. These stones could be carved into a likeness of the dead, but some families opted to simply carve personal heraldry or runes into simple stones if their skill was not sufficient or available. These stones were held in vaults by the priesthood and used to teach the lessons of the past, remind kin of oaths sworn, and even arbitrate tribal disputes. That it not to say it was an everyday occurrence - the toll of such rituals was hard on the clerics who conducted them - but tales are handed down of holy days or anniversaries that gave families a chance to commune with the (sometimes long) dead.
The availability of their predecessors meant that dwarven writing was limited to the most important communications, and not for the keeping of records. This might seem comical to the reader today, knowing as we do the jokes about dwarven accounting and the verbosity of their prose; but in days of yore why would records be kept when one’s memory could be kept fresh with a discussion with one’s ancestor? The jokes about dwarven grudges and their duration have perhaps some foundations such that offspring would be regularly
reminded of favours owed and grudges held by those that started them many generations ago.
Practically, this also meant that dwarf was not simply themselves but had the backing of their entire ancestry when called upon. When threatened by dispute, generations of legal minds could be consulted, and it made the dwarves staggeringly resilient and efficient in battle. With bold advice and centuries of experience to support the renowned dwarven discipline, the dwarrow were rarely defeated in battle, especially when they had time to consult and form a strategy. Of course, each dwarven soldier was driven by a desire to impress their ancestors and perhaps one day be received by an Ancestor Stone of their own.
But we must leave such blasphemous superstitions now and return to a narrative that has foundations in fact and can be corroborated with human records.
Pierin Dell
The first test of the dwarven kingdom was to come many centuries after their migration. Since that first ice-age the barbaric goblin warbands and their bestial allies gnawed away at the borders of the dwarven realm. As a second great winter began to envelope the north, the northern tribes that did not follow Odan gradually became cut off, and trade with them ceased altogether. What came instead was an onslaught of goblin raiders, vicious bugbear warbands, and gangs of mighty trolls. After an initial trickle, the ways on land became overrun with foes, including savage hillmen that wore the skins of their enemies into battle. Travel overland was too dangerous.
In this time, the peril was so great that a combined army of dwarves, Vallasaari and the fledgling kingdom of Amund was summoned to stand against it. The foes met the tide of goblinkin at Pierin Dell (north of Huluun). As the dwarves tell it, this battle was won by their tactical excellence, and its aftermath ruined by Vallasaari indiscipline. The dwarrow adopted a seemingly vulnerable position in the open ground yet commanded the heights and held Vallasaari soldiers in reserve. The goblins pressed on all sides around the isolated dwarven group but found the dwarves entrenched, prepared, and impossible to dislodge with troll, worg, or wyvern. For a day the horde poured into the valley, and the dwarves held firm against overwhelming odds until the jaws of the trap were closed and their allies swarmed from the mountainsides under barrages of artillery-fire and Vallasaari magic. To tell it from the dwarven perspective, the Amundmen fought well but suffered many casualties, and the Vallasaari were overly cautious. Their caution allowed a great many of the enemy to retreat, and escape into the shadows and to the north. The dwarrow were furious, knowing that word of their presence and so many survivors would only embolden stronger foes. Angered by what they perceived as weakness, the dwarves annulled the alliance. For their part the Vallasaari admired the dwarven discipline, but it seemed to them that the Iron King was happy that they risked great losses. This perception bred suspicion. The Vallasaari did not object to the end of the alliance; it served its purpose and perhaps over time they could trust the dwarves’ tactics. But later events only fuelled that suspicion.
The Gwathuran War
At Gwathur, the kin of Ingrod did not participate in the battle at Pierin Dell. They withdrew from the Kingdom of Iron somewhat, and had expanded their settlement out into the plains, establishing trading settlements in lands close to the Ilantha forest belt. Although many centuries, we are told, since the Sundering of the Elves, the Vallasaari still regarded these forests are their sacred homeland, and jealously guarded the regions around it, even though passage through the forest and into the immortal realm was denied them. Naturally, they attempted to hinder further expansion, first through diplomatic means and then by waylaying traders and explorers, often to their deaths. The Ilantha forest quickly became a source of fear for Ingrod’s kin. So in the face of this obstruction, as any dwarf miner knew, working around the problem would dislodge it. The Ingrodkin set up a forward outpost at the forest edge and used the slow press of his army to sweep slowly through the forest, destroying anything that would imperil his lands. The Vallasaari say they had no alternative and retaliated against the dwarven supply lines, sacking several settlements and driving refugees back to Gwathur. It was soon all-out war.
With great restraint, Iron King Olin refused to aid the city of Gwathur, on the insistence from the Vallasaari envoys of dozens of clans that this would only provoke them to strike at dwarrow cities all over the north. The Vallasaari of the Ilantha border were fanatics known as the Redeemed, a law unto themselves, but fanatically devoted to the defence of the wards that protected the immortal realm of the Elves, that also held at bay the flow of spirits and demons from our world. Both peoples stayed their hands to avoid a continental conflict on a scale unseen, and counselled peace.
Scorched Earth Noddrym of Gwathur led the dwarves, implacably
slaughtering everything that lived in the forest belt, whilst his people were being harried from all sides by the crafty Vallasaari clans. Their numbers waned to the extent that the campaign became endangered, but vast swathes of forest were now tamed and ready to be settled. So Noddrym turned the land against the Vallasaari at last; he set the forests ablaze. It devastated his opponents. Their tactics relied on using the forest as cover, allying with the woodland animals and dire monsters to strike at weak points in the dwarven lines and wreak havoc before retreating and preparing again elsewhere. Noddrym turned his defence into attack and began to clear the clans from his path. The setback had a profound impact on the Redeemed, and a less ideological faction seemed to lead them into the final months of the war. They fell back against the edge of the mortal realm, the girdle inscribed by the Elves of the beginning of the world. But in a last-ditch gambit, Vallasaari mages sent assassins by surprise into Noddyrm’s camp and slew the lord and his family, before being quickly overcome. The Vallasaari, at seemingly great cost, then sent assassins who slew the clerics of Gwathur itself, the religious supporters the campaign relied upon. With their leader gone, and the guardians of the ancestors exposed to the enemy, both sides stepped back from mutual destruction. Hostilities ceased. A peace was concluded, under which the Iron Kingdom took direct control over Gwathur and
the Redeemed ceded control of the border forests to the powerful Vallasaari clan of Niradhe. Civility, if not harmony, returned to the lands of the dwarven east. The Vallasaari reclaimed their forests, but committed to protect dwarven interests near those forests. Meanwhile, shorn of Noddrym’s zealots, the Iron Kingdom grew stronger and more united.
Edûnwaur the Nightbringer
The tale of the Nightbringer is supported by similar myths of the Amundmen. Their records cannot validate its precise details, and many great bones unearthed recently are said to originate from the great wyrm, particularly by archaeologists more versed in commerce than history.
The goblin survivors of Pierin Dell bled back into the mountains. Some fled back to their spawning ground farther north. And from some of these survivors came word of the strength of the dwarves, the power of the Vallasaari, and the heroism of humans. To the fell black dragon Edûnwaur these tales were an affront. The Nightbringer was lord of a great domain in the frozen north and its tempered valleys, ranging far and wide to hunt whichever creatures it desired – the freer and rarer the better. Its scales were ancient, encrusted with chitin and reinforced with obsidian. And it was gargantuan; capable of swallowing a cottage whole. Nothing mortal could withstand it. And yet tales came of lands to the south that sent floods of verminous goblins back as survivors. The goblins brought tales of the magical riches of the Vallasaari, and dwarven metalcraft. Edûnwaur took flight with an eye for despoiling these lands and these civilised people.
The Frost Pact But the Nightbringer was not a creature of simple
avarice. It sent the goblins back south, seeking out the Vallasaari clans in their homes, and commanded the frost giants in its domain to challenge the Iron King at Angaroth; a task which they relished. Thus the great wyrm split the victorious parties of Angaroth from each other. The humans were deemed the weakest of the three, and here Edûnwaur struck first, demanding tribute from the Amundmen. King Wend of the Amundmen refused, but many in his hinterlands turned over their coffers to the dragon. To the great Edûnwaur the finest items must have been those dwarven crafts, and it now demanded King Wend ally his people to those goblins which harried the Vallasaari. On his second refusal the enormous wyrm smote the Kings Hall at Carrowend and poisoned the river the royal city relied upon.
With their clan-lands under attack from goblins, and relations still cooler after Gwathur, the Vallasaari lent aid to neither Amund nor Angaroth. Perhaps the tale is obscured by the victorious parties to temper the role of the Vallasaari clans, but it seems the chosen of Aeladh played little part in this tale until the end. However it happened, King Wend moved his army to aid the Iron King. This drew Edûnwaur to the mountain city, where his giants had lain waste much of the outer defences with great crude siege weapons. And as the Nightbringer took direct control of the attack, it spotted
that the dwarves had already abandoned the surface city outer rings. The dragon ordered the Jarl to assault the mountain itself, but the dwarven lords were one step ahead again. As the giants marched through the surface city, the ground opened up and collapsed into great pits that swallowed the giant’s army. The Amundmen outflanked the remnants, and swept up the baggage of the great northern host. Edûnwaur vented its fury through the gates of the underground city, sending great acidic rivers down into the heart of Angaroth. It called out the Iron King. And to its surprise, despite an army at his command, King Errain came forth.
The King’s retinue held firm, despite the wyrm’s terrifying presence, but their king answered the dragon’s challenge personally. Amundish soldiers who witnessed the event spoke of the dwarven king, armoured in dark metal plates that shimmered with the presence of the dwarven ancestors, and armed with a war hammer that held within its head the Ancestor Stone of Odan the Pilgrim. The King and the Wyrm battled on the hillsides around the city. The king’s dark mantle held the dragon’s caustic attacks at bay, and the Nightbringer’s scales deflected each blow from the war hammer. But it seemed to onlookers that Errain spoke to the dragon in its own tongue, goading the beast into mistakes. Edûnwaur was felled by a blow that cracked its long neck, a blow made in the name of Odan himself, he who once fled the ancestors of Edûnwaur. The wrathful vengeance of his descendants upon the dragons that forced his pilgrimage south was complete. Edûnwaur died on the fields outside Angaroth; its destructive expedition was over.
To commemorate this great victory, the dwarves erected a monument of bones, stone, and metals; as much to tell the world of their power as it was a warning to other great foes. Only in the south was so comparably foolhardy a monument constructed.
The Rise of Vindammar
The lands of Calenor were home to few dwarven outposts. Here, the dwarves lived alongside humans, Vallasaari, and the rarer species of the world, and whilst they occupied a prominent position it was not like their new hegemony in Forodain. That belonged to another migrating power from the east.
The eastern outpost of dwarven power was Mohl. This underground fortress kept watch on both the underdark and the Valag mountains, the natural boundary of the western southlands. At first, the migration of exiles from Bithir was a trickle, and they settled alongside and integrated with the existing valley peoples well. But safety proved attractive to those fleeing for their lives and their faith.
The influx of easterners destabilised the disparate settlements of the Kainan valley but their wealth and trade connections changed the prospects for those that dwelt there. This brought new opportunities to the dwarven people, not least a market for their considerable craftmanship, and both prospered for a time. A treaty established with the fledgling Vindammari domain and Wâdergård Oftun delineated the easterners' borders for several generations, backed by hostages for each side. The dwarves of Mohl and across Calenor took the opportunities to multiply their wealth using the Vindammari trade routes, and the Vindammari built great structures and fortifications using dwarven lore.
Vindammar was the first true city in the Kainan valley and it became the City of White Spires thanks to skills passed on by the dwarves in these decades, and, before long, became the capital of a cohesive state with boundaries between the Valag and Kazgund mountains, with their own pantheon of gods that resembled a
human extended family. It was also by the toil of their engineers that they made roads through the Kazgund range, and from that simple seed sprang the rapid expansion of the Vindammar Empire west. Their laws changed to rule their expanding domain, sparking a winter of civil strife that lasted a decade and resulted in the ascension of a sole ruler, Uriam I, as its first Emperor. A great spire was erected in Vindammar; a monument to the eternal rule of his dynasty as the keepers of Aeladh’s Ardent Flame and mimicked by other such constructions across the empire.
This also began the Common Reckoning’s first year, a parochially ignorant idea to the dwarves and Vallasaari, for whom year zero was but a fable in the mists of time. But as the Vindammari settlers struck west and into lands of dwarven power, conflict inevitably arose. And inevitably the dwarves proved too powerful. The imperials posed little threat to the underground domains of the dwarrow, and one-sided overland campaigns soon made them reappraise their expansion into lands held by the dwarves. And as the westward expansion ceased, the social cohesion of the empire began to fray.
But the pains of this new empire’s growth mattered little to the dwarves, for whom the fabric of their own society was suddenly and cataclysmically torn apart.
The Severance
“I knew them all, like my own kin;
generations of our best and bravest. They inspired, guided, and consoled us all. It was like all dwarvenkind came with us
and saw our glories. We had our ancestors there beside us, cheering us on. And then,
one day, they were all gone.” The words of Stonespeaker Gloric of Angaroth describe the societal impact of the Severance, but it is not understating the event to say it was the end of the dwarven world. The date is uncertain only because the facts of the event were kept hidden for so long, and only a few dwarven priests have spoken with a clear mind to human scholars.
The voices of the dwarven ancestors were silent. The rituals could not reach them, nor augurs speak to them. All across their lands families began to despair at the loss of old friends and mentors, but their faith was kept strong by the priesthood who insisted it would only be a short time before they returned. Magic still worked in other ways, but the souls of their fallen kin were silent. Even the kin of the King – even Odan himself – were still. As the crisis deepened, the high clerics used magic to mimic the voices of the King’s ancestors to fool both his vassals and his foes. Some wondered if the King himself had enacted this as some sort of spiritual power grab to deprive the people of the mentors while he retained his own. But the ruse would not hold.
It is impossible to overstate the damage this had on morale. The bitter blow struck at all levels of dwarven society that was unprepared to go on without the guidance, arbitration, and support of their ancestors. Weeping rulers implored lifeless rocks for aid at the same time as artisans grieved for their parents’ wisdom and wit. On a practical level it cast all plans into doubt. Were the new soldiers really prepared as they had been in the time of earlier generations? How did
their forefathers cope with trade disputes or several bad harvests? Could the kingdom hold without the judgement of those that helped to build it? The future suddenly became extremely perilous for a people with enemies on all sides and discontent from within. And always in the background were the gnawing questions: how did this happen, and who could have done this?
First to note the change in dwarven disposition were their staunchest allies, and greatest rivals, the Vallasaari. Even without the immortality of their Ilanthan forebears’, the lifespan of a Vallasaari was reckoned in centuries, and they held memories of conversations with dwarven lords long-deceased. Councils between their clan guardians and dwarven lords were often held alongside and treaties guaranteed by the spirits of those they once knew in life, and there were limits to the mimicry of the dwarven priests. Several such gatherings were abandoned acrimoniously; if the ancestors no longer deemed the Vallasaari worthy of their presence then what value did the dwarves really place on what was discussed? Worse yet were those deceptions that the Vallasaari saw through. Many that dealt with the dwarves now doubted their loyalty and their honour; Rumours among men, gnomes, and other civilised folk spread that the dwarrow had been abandoned by their ‘gods’, and a shadow descended over the dwarven people.
Vrægondyr the Destroyer
Iron King Errain was not passive while his people lingered in doubt and despair. Word reached him of mines that held vast reserves of metals that turned away terrifying blows, and he sought to hoard this resource and restore some advantage to his people. He struck seams of adamantite ore, both at Mohl in Calenor and in his lands around Angaroth in Forodain, and set aside all risks to win the metals. But many died in the finding and winning of the precious material, unearthing fell creatures and demons as they dug deeper shafts. Creatures that lay dormant since the beginning of the mortal world awoke and took their toll. The Vallasaari reminded their old dwarven friends of the Elves’ fall from Aeladh’s grace and counselled against so single-minded a focus. But the dwarves deemed it a need so great that all caution was seemingly abandoned.
In the depth of a mine at Dorl, on the northern edge of the dwarven realm around Angaroth, deep in the Emainn Aechils, the adamantite miners struck a hollow. It was the slumbering ground of a dragon of elder days, an ancient red dragon known as Vrægondyr, the Destroyer, the Red Doom. At first it was said that the dwarves were confounded by the riches of its hoard that they did not see the beast, but others spoke of a confounding dweomer that enthralled the miners and their lords. Unlike the dragons of old, Vrægondyr took prisoners, and from them it learned of the Kingdom and the King, the fate of Edûnwaur, and the Severence. It burst from Dorl and claimed the mining settlement as its own, before sending out enthralled envoys to seek tribute from civilised lands and gain control over the barbaric.
The goblins of the mountains saw their opportunity for revenge on the dwarves who cursed them so many
generations before. They gathered with their goblinkin and hosts of trolls and a few vengeful frost giants and struck underground and over land at the dwarven outposts. But this time something was different. The invaders felt the fragility of dwarven discipline; a doubt that festered in all their preparations. They sensed weakness. But they were not alone in perceiving a problem. Vallasaari Clan Firdhe offered soldiers and aid to the Iron King, but their generosity was rebuffed, lest they come to see the problem that ate at the heart of dwarven society and take advantage themselves. The shadow of the Gwathur war still loomed after a long age. But aid arrived unasked-for from the people of Amund who felt their hope of survival lay with the bulwark of Angaroth and the slayers of Edûnwaur.
Alliance Renewed Despite aid from the south and provisioning by the
Vallasaari, the Iron Kingdom addressed the goblin horde by itself. Human towns and villages were lain waste across the Amund steppe. Goblins overran once impenetrable dwarven outposts, seizing and defiling anything they found there. They poured like a breaking wave through the roots of the dwarven underdeeps, forcing the Kingdom to retreat back to Angaroth. Carrowend was imperilled again, and even the Vallasaari as far east as the Emainn Estir shored up their defences should the dwarven city fall. The foremost Guardians of Vallasaari clans travelled with their retinues to the dwarven capital. They traversed a landscape devastated, abandoned to the pillaging horde by all civilised people, and they cursed the stubbornness of the dwarrow King Errain. The once-invincible Iron Kingdom was smouldering and on the verge of collapse. Refugees filled his halls and his people had nowhere to flee; the Iron King’s defenders were whittled down by attacks from the deep places beneath his halls and from a besieging force on the mountain surface. But before the horde could overrun the Iron Throne, Vrægondyr intervened. Sensing the moment of total victory, the ancient and bitter foe challenged the Iron King come face him in single
combat to show the might that felled the Nightbringer. The intent of the wyrm was to humiliate the Iron King, and to reveal his weakness to the world. But the challenge was answered by two Vallasaari Guardians, Firdhe and Niradhe, who fought their way to support Errain, who had donned the mantle and took up the hammer of his ancestors.
The three lords of Vallasaari and Dwarf could barely hold the ancient wyrm at bay with all their martial prowess. The great red wyrm was craftier than the black Nightbringer and ordered the goblin horde into the capital at last while it battled the three captains. They fought it on the ground and in the skies by aid of eagles and griffons, but Vrægondyr had mastery of the air, defeating Firdhe to leave only two foes. But Firdhe took a great toll on the elder beast; his lance tore one wing and lodged in the Destroyer’s flank which forced the dragon onto the ground. But the remaining two could not hold the wyrm at bay. It pushed them back to the gates of the undercity, storming the threshold of the King’s Gate and sending torrents of flame into the beleaguered defences.
The two lords fell back, yielding the gates to the dragon. They took swift counsel with the Wâdergård and understood that the city was no longer under their control. Errain agreed to hold off the wyrm and its host for long enough to evacuate the city. It is said that Vrægondyr took a moment to address the silent Ancestor Vaults before turning its attention to the dwarven rear-guard. The king and his retinue came face to face at last with the Destroyer. No tales are told of the last moments of Errain the Iron King, for none survived the wyrm, and none returned to tell the tale.
Side By Side But the tide of battle was not all in the dragon’s favour. On land, the Amundmen and Vallasaari outflanked and surrounded the goblins and put many giants to the sword. They too pressed in against the walls as the dragon took the gates.
The emissaries of clans Niradhe and Firdhe drew the attention of Vrægondyr for long enough to allow the surviving dwarves and the Guardian Niradhe escape and lead many survivors from the ancient capital. But as they met on the hillsides that looked onto the ruined city, they saw a goblin captain hoist a victory trophy from the outer walls. Upon that banner was the broken corpse of Errain. With his death confirmed, his son Dringold ascended to the throne. But to the astonishment of the allied armies, Dringold set about a plan to retake the city at once before the goblins could use it as a base and a breeding ground. Once their incredulity subsided, the allies saw the clear purpose of the new Iron King. Angaroth would be impossible to retake once fortified. It presented a terrible danger of a fortress that could imperil the entire Amund steppe once settled as a goblin hive. And so they agreed to aid the king and set about works to assault the city.
Barely three weeks went by until King Dringold was eager to begin the assault, using his knowledge of the weak points below the city and of undermining strips to assist the overland attack. The men of Amund, with limited ability to see in the underworld, nor battle the goblins during the night, set up weapons to bombard the walls and to threaten Vrægondyr once it emerged. And emerge it did. As the Vallasaari and dwarves led the assault overland, the Destroyer emerged and took flight ready to destroy the siege weapons. But mortal sorcerers and magicians warded it away, and the great bolt throwers made it impossible for the dragon to return to its mountain lair without great injury. So it fled. The attackers pressed into the city with elation at the banishment of the gravest threat they faced, but once inside they fell foul of weeks’ worth of goblin traps and sabotage. But they pressed on, knowing they had the goblins on the run. But days later, when the majority of the attacking host was within the mountain, the great wyrm returned. It ravaged the catapults and war ballistae that held it from the peak, and issued a challenge once again to the Kings of the free peoples
of the north. Niradhe and Dringold answered, this time with the support of their armies, from within the city. But now, assured that its foes were within the city, it closed the jaws of the trap at last.
The goblins worked, in secret, for many weeks before their assault to redirect the flow of the underground river that fed the city. At a strike from the great dragon, one of the gate-towers was collapsed, setting off a chain of collapses that bursting dams which held back the torrent of the river in the upper halls. The cascade of water flooded the lower halls wherein battled the bulk of the Vallasaari and Dwarves with the goblin host. Thousands perished, and the great constructs of the city were washed away. But the Dwarven King and his steadfast ally Niradhe came out to face the dragon at last, assured of their doom.
They fought, alongside their retinues, against the mighty beast. The cause was lost, but the Iron King would not allow a retreat, and so they fought to the last. The great dragon toyed cruelly with them, assured of its victory over both the city and the lords of the free. But the siegecraft of the men of Amund was beyond its reckoning, and its wounded wing was once again injured by an Amundish harpoon, and the next skewered its leg, pinning it to the city floor. And it was not only the ancient lord of dragons that had a trap up its sleeve. King Dringold and Niradhe held the attention of the Destroyer, but send word to their sappers, who begged against the will of their lords, but upon their direct commands they let loose their pins below the surface of the city. The very floor of the city fell into the earth. Their work was intended only as a snare for the great beast, but it was magnified by the dragon’s own ploy, as level upon level collapsed below them, and the very side of the mountain was brought down into the hole. Vrægondyr the Red Doom was slain at last, and shared a grave with the last Iron King to wear the crown, and his most loyal Vallasaari ally.
The End of the Iron Kingdom
When the dust settled, both Vallasaari and dwarves had lost their leaders in the ruins of the dwarven city. Dringold had no obvious heirs, with many killed in the flood, but there was little enough time for noble infighting before the Vallasaari, in their grief, withdrew their soldiers. They deemed further sacrifice needless; the dying vengeance of the dragon exposed the foolhardiness of the task to retake a city that had more death than life about it. If the dwarves wished to throw more lives into the pit that remained in efforts to restore what had plainly been lost, they would do so alone. Vallasaari would not. After years of campaigning in Forodain, the Emissary of Niradhe led the Vallasaari away. The Dwarrow lords, themselves clouded by grief, cursed his name and his people, branding them traitors and oath-breakers.
The departure of the Vallasaari focused the dwarven lords on choosing an heir. While soldiers worked to clear some of the wreckage and rescue their comrades, rival tribes argued their competing claims on the throne. Once great dwarven tribes reduced to petty squabbles, unearthing ancient grudges in the shadow of their ruined capital. The negotiations descended into acrimony, and even the compromise candidate could not unite them around a common purpose. In the weeks that followed, the recapture of Angaroth was abandoned as rival lords were elevated to the throne. But without the physical crown, throne, nor the support of a united Wâdergård or Wâdhesråd, these pretenders ruled only as far as their tribal settlements.
As the dwarven army withdrew, the capital was recaptured by wild creatures and the spawn of the under-deeps. The men of Amund constructed Wenenwatch Castle to guard against any out-pouring of foes from the mountain.
The days of the Iron King were over; dwarven society became inward-looking and riven with petty tribal rivalries. They sought the aid of human settlements to support their claims. Where once the dwarven king drew tribute from northern towns and villages, now the petty clan-kings were beholden to these same folk, trading rights to their mines in return for soldiers, ships, or simply the promised support of a local lord. As they sought means to authenticate their own claims, they weakened their own family lands and holdings. The dwarves went on, but disunited and weak. It was not long before that weakness was understood and taken advantage of.
Surviving Vindammar In the south, the dwarrow of Calenor always sat apart from royal politics. The youth saw an opportunity to elevate their southern brethren by attempting to recapture the mountain city. None succeeded and few returned. Those that remained made a good living in trade with their neighbours as they always had. But now that the royal embargo was lifted, they became prosperous by mining and selling what adamantite they could. It still took the powerful forges of the dwarven underholds to work the metal into tools and weapons, but they found their way into the hands of wealthy lords and their greatest warriors.
Among those that received adamantine gifts were the Emperors of Vindammar. Their reach extended across the southern edge of the Crimson Sea to modern Anglass. And at the same time as the news of dwarven struggles in the north reached them, the Emperor and the ruling classes were so unpopular that a popular uprising looked likely. Reaching for a simple fix, the Emperor renegotiated the terms of land deals and vassalage of the dwarven settlements in his lands. The absent ancestors, skilled negotiators of many generations, could not avail them, nor the military might of yesteryear, and much land was lost to the corrupt overseers of the Empire of the Ardent Flame.
Baalphegor is Cast Down The coming of the Corruptor broke like a wave
of terror across Calenor. Baalphegor’s fall from the heavens to the mortal realm came at the cost of the Vindammari Empire, but also heralded an age of
darkness. All who relied on the Empire for gold, trade, food, and faith, now found themselves isolated. The rise of the orcs from the Kazgund range drove a cascade of refugees west. Some
Vindammari clerics who fled their lands found common cause with the dwarves, who latched on to its
petty ‘gods’ to replace their own ancestorial idolatry. But the dwarven mines and holds in Vindammari heartlands were overrun by Baalphegor’s minions, and soon became infested with his creatures who plundered their riches and learned of their crafts. Even in the far west, creatures came from the earth that no dwarf had yet
seen, and all settlements experienced the beginning of a long, attritional battle against emboldened orcs. The ever-adaptable humans coped better with this change in fortunes than the dwarrow, and soon the underdeeps and settlements there became
less tenable. After providing a valuable bulwark against the worst years of evil incursions, It was not long before dwarves sought refuge in human lands. In this way the dwarves of Calenor learned to prosper, after
Dwarves and the World There are two distinct dwarven cultures in the known world. These are broadly divided up into the more traditional, conservative, and introspective Mountain Dwarves, who primarily dwell in Forodain, and their more accommodating and open-minded lowland cousins the Hill Dwarves. The majority of Hill dwarves live in Calenor, but they can be found among human settlements on the northern coasts as well. Both castes of dwarf share the same traditions and uphold them to varying degrees; the southerners have more readily accepted the word of Aeladh and joined the Covenant to spread His word. The northerners do enough to keep the church off their backs and pay generous tithes to support its civilising influence.
Besides these two cultures there exists one offshoot of the dwarrow, whose relationship to the kin of Odan we don’t entirely understand. It is said that in the mythical past, there was another branch of the Odan line known as the Gray dwarves, or Duergar. They were led by another pilgrim who sensed great power in the deep places beneath the world. But they were led into a trap and enslaved by the enigmatic Illithids. After centuries of enslavement and alteration by their tyrannical masters they broke their bonds and found a way back to the surface, but they could not abide the light. Their culture was focused on greed, toil and brutality, which suited their affinity for both cruelty and craft, augmented by their innate powers gained under the Illithids. They possess exceptional crafting abilities; even if only for weapons of war or tools for labour, not things of beauty. They mock their dwarven kin’s once-great kingdom and its reliance on their forebears’, whereas the Duergar survived and thrived without such aid. Nowadays the Gray Dwarves seek out the ruined under-halls of their cousins for plunder and clues that might show a way into the impassable ruins of Angaroth. Their wealth is used merely for the power it grants and the cruelty it permits over others, and for this reason relations with other dwarves are hostile. But despite this they sporadically trade with surface dwellers, particularly at times of need when profiteering pays well, or for something they greatly desire.
a fashion, and dwarves lent their defences to defend the lands of the west from total conquest by Kaina’s armies. In the north, their plight soon became desperate.
The Ulla Conir
In early 660CR the peoples of the Shrouded Isle of Conir arrived on the shores of Forodain seeking conquest and riches. Their ships often raided the coast seeking slaves and victims to sacrifice to their disgusting idols, but this time they came in force and backed by supernatural allies that helped King Braedan II sweep all before them. The dwarves remained neutral at first, less willing to take a stand alone against an unknown foe. But soon they came to understand the Ulla Conir, and the terrifying Meargha that led their otherworldly contingent. They stood before the Ullan armies at the request of the Egellant Templars; the church spanned many kingdoms and was instrumental in uniting opposition to the invaders. But the Ullan host moved deftly and with alacrity to cut kingdoms from each other. They used their knowledge, of the rivalries and petty grudges that divided mankind, to expert advantage. The dwarves fought soundly but were soon defeated and great numbers slaughtered.
The Babharkka Decree Braedan’s brother and Tanist Connobar was singular in his malice toward the dwarrow. At Barbharkka,
a human city built over the dwarven outpost and underground fortress, he earned the name Butcher of Babharkka by slaughtering every dwarf and signing a decree banning them from lands above and below ground in the Ullan dominion. The dwarven guilds across western Forodain were abolished, their members sent into hiding, and their properties taken by the Ulla Conir chieftains as rewards for loyalty. Those that ousted their dwarven neighbours would be given rights within his new kingdom.
The decades that followed were catastrophic for dwarrowfolk, as their loyalties were betrayed by former allies. By 790 CR, only a handful of mines and hill-towns were still home to dwarves of the north, although a few hidden underdeeps still existed far beyond the skill of the islanders to find. This Ullan strategy was key to their later success in persuading the tribes to carry forwards the conquest to the edge of Forodain; the gold and silver of sacked dwarven holds allowed King Braedan and his heirs to maintain control over his subjects, pay for further levies of troops, and removed a troublesome obstacle to their domination of the mainland. The few dwarven settlements that surrendered were given governors by the overland chieftains. They were condemned as craven by their own kin.
Liberation The Ullan dominion reigned for two full centuries,
gradually succumbing to greater and greater misrule by
malevolent and hideous beasts known as the Meargha Brothers. They overlooked basic governance and kept their population oppressed by fear, but fuelling great resentment like a powder keg. That powder found a spark when Men-i-Rauth led his Carcaddi army across the Eireadh Ros and gathered a host of dwarves among his adherents. The Meargha Dominion ended as the peoples north threw off their masters in 840 CR and became briefly united under the banner of Egel and Blessed Aegas. But the new king did not reinstate dwarven claims to their previous holdings centuries ago. Many had been held by generations of human families and mines worked by human hands. But the reign of terror and exile was over. Dwarves could now travel freely, prompting many to revisit their abandoned holdings. From these meagre footings many descendants of old Wâdergård families laid plans to restore their heritage and perhaps even recover the Iron Throne once more.
Merchants and Mercenaries
Relentless incursions by the minions of Baalphegor in the south and the decay of their ancestral holds in the north led most dwarves to abandon the underground way of life and embrace a shared prosperity with humankind. Nevertheless, their affinity and tradition of craftsmanship and governance often placed them in positions of power or trust. As at Babharkka, this position sometimes provoked human jealousy and made an easy pretext for racist assaults. But elsewhere dwarrow and humankind came to learn and thrive with close contact.
Thus the dwarven guild became the main community unit for dwarves in civilised lands. They had no territorial power but were economically influential and operated within the borders of human lands. Individual families controlled vast sums of wealth in the form of mining labour, rights to clan-operated mines, shipping from former clan-holds, and the movement of stocks in ports along the Crimson Sea. These were more successful in Calenor among the hill dwarf peoples rather than their more traditional and stoic mountainous brethren in the north, who preferred to focus on retaking their old land and power.
Traditions and Innovations These sub-societies became politically and
economically powerful and wielded influence far beyond the strength in their numbers or martial prowess. Princes consulted the dwarven guilds before embarking on military expedition, and they became something of lenders of last resort. The collapse of their Ancestor Cult required a new way to record events and reckoning, resulting in a detailed set of archives that were duplicated across each guild. These archives recorded events but also communicated intention, offered commentary, provided a moral guide for guild masters. Much of this morality takes the form of a reminder of debts paid, oaths fulfilled, and honour settled. But alongside it is the famous record of the indiscretions of allies, debtors, and friends. Whilst not quite the Dwarven Book of Grudges that some satirists hope for, this record is a powerful instrument and guide for dwarven leaders and helps to maintain the famous dwarven cold stoicism when dealing with old friends or
new allies alike.
Whilst for outsiders these guilds may seem like closed circles of oligarchic power, their real strength is the spiritual and social support for dwarven tradition. The focus of this is, naturally, the shared remembrance of the lost ancestors. Within the guild, the guild masters are religious figureheads as well as the political leaders and chief accountants the rest of the worlds usually sees. Many come from old Wâdergård families. Solemn prayer is still offered to their sacrilegious stone idols in the forlorn hope that, one day, the voices of their friends and forebears might return.
For many dwarves, longing for a lost kingdom and lost ancestry spurred them to leave their insular society and seek their fortune as professional soldiers. The hardy soldiering lifestyle suits the rugged discipline of the dwarf, and many excel in fighting for money, upholding the famed dwarven virtues of loyalty and fulfilling of oaths (or contracts). Despite turning their backs on dwarven societies and putting their honour for sale to the highest bidder, such soldiers foster important
links across great distances, and many are counted as friends in courts around the civilised world. This is encouraged by the dwarf elders, both in guilds and in traditional underground settlements, in the hope it will draw support to recover the relics of Angaroth, the Ancestral Stones, or even journey to find the birthplace of Odan the Pilgrim.
But not all simply took up arms. Others remembered their ancestral beginnings and took to the sail. Advances in naval navigation allowed swifter passage to the lands beyond the southern plains, lands that were now within the power of wealthier states like Anglass to exploit. Among the first explorers of these sweltering
jungles were descendants of the original shipwrights of Odol’s Clan. These proud sailors and navigators struck inland along the great bays of Quadiza and across the Pearl Seas to establish the Anglic colonies of Volstaat and Par-Imgele. The colonies offered renewed hope for hundreds of down-at-heel dwarf craftsmen and soldiers, offering a chance to begin anew. Colonisation of those tropical shores today relies heavily on the stubbornness of the dwarror, who simple will not let nature defeat their rigour and discipline.
But more recently, dwarves were instrumental in defeating threats on both sides of the Crimson Sea.
Secession, Succession, and the Black Hand
When the Grand Baron of DiRoche finally raised support and funds to secede from the Anglic Union, it fell to individual dwarven families to decide upon what
action to take. Some had long-standing alliances
with cities of Anglass, and others with the
baron. After a long discussion it was
decided that this civil war would not benefit the dwarrow aside
from any mercenary roles they might have contracted to undertake. Dwarven blood would not needlessly be spilled. Their neutrality earned them no favours and made it easy, decades later, for the Free City of Oster to confiscate dwarven land and force many into exile following the destruction of part of the city’s outer defences in a land dispute. Much of that ill will was reversed when numerous council leaders of the Osterraad were discovered plotting the assassination of Grand Baron Lucien Carolignus to draw Oster back into the Anglic Union. The role of a dwarven mercenary Thorin Heyerdahl in uncovering the plot helped him achieve some respite for his fellows in
the city and beyond. In Calenor, the majority of dwarves still practice their outdated worship of inert rocks, but the role of their northern kin in recent upheavals exposed the strength of their conversion to Aeladh.
What began in 1384 CR as a regional conflict over the succession of King Edric II of Heath between he and his Uncle Ennis, Duke of Howland was overshadowed by the arrival of orc soldiers in their thousands. They arrived in secret by boat, underground passages, or summoned from portals to Kaina, in numbers and with a speed few today understand. They plotted a line of destruction and corruption northward. The army was led by the Baalphegor’ best captain, Morg the Black Hand, and it was the discovery of this that spurred nations everywhere to act. Dwarves enlisted in the armies of their human liege lords in huge numbers, remembering the days of grand alliances at Pierin Dell, and the misery wrought on their southern kin after the fall of Vindammar. This was an opportunity for them to strike a fatal blow at the Lord of Corruption, and they relished the opportunity. But as Aeladh’s clerics prayed over the soldiers before they marched, they found the voices of many dwarrow already loud with prayer. Truly the dwarves now had the words on their lips in praise of Aeladh, in fulfilment of the Covenant between mortals and God. This was taken as a holy portent. And in the months to come, the portent was fulfilled as Baalphegor’s legions were trapped in a valley close by Wikkensmeade. The battle fought there was decisive; despite the terrible conditions and choking disease that inhibited the allied armies, the bravery of dwarven soldiers as they rallied their fellows was instrumental in carrying the field of battle. In recognition of that, the Covenant permitted the open veneration of dwarven ancestors so long as they were recognised alongside the Divines and, of course, Aeladh.
The Days Ahead
Today the dust of war has settled for a time and the dwarves of our world occupy an intriguing position in human lands; individually they suffer intolerance for their stoic, melancholy, and often impious ways, but they are often respected as a community of great wealth and wisdom. Often, a traveller might find a statue to a shipwright, mason, or smith, whose belt held a long beard as he oversaw new walls, a rebuilt harbour, or spears for the reformed city guard. But conversely, the image of a drunken dwarf rattling his coins and muttering of bygone glories is too common a sight in the towns and cities of the civilised world.
Families that were once tribes, the tribes that were once a kingdom, and the kingdom that once spanned Forodain and commanded alliances in Calenor, all lie asunder. The shattered remains of the Iron Kingdom lie in fragments scattered in the mines of the hills, the merchant classes of cities, and the mercenary companies that ply the world. Some strive to make a new way in the human world as best they can, with the pride and tenacity of their forefathers. But here and there, using the titles and forms of the old days, the Wâdergård and Wâdhesråd work under the surface of their human world. They work in secret with their kin, through old tunnels, honour-bound friends, and perilous shipping routes, to restore glory to their people. Each dwarf carries the memory of his or her people through stories that were once the voices of their dead kin; the idea of the once-great throne lost beneath the mountain. Lost; until such a time as one comes to reclaim it and anoint a new king. Or claim the honour for themselves. 
Glints refracted across the gem in Hurlin’s tweezers. It wasn’t worthless, but not worth the ransom being demanded by the psychotic warrior glaring at him across the counter. There would be violence. What would his great-grandfather have done, dozens of human generations ago? The days of asking his spirit in ancestral communion were long gone. Yet more worthless stones, he thought. Hurlin’s beard did its work of hiding the tension on his jawline as he pretended to inspect the jewel further.
“A badly flawed specimen I’m afraid,” he sighed at last and, on cue, the Vallasaari warrior reacted, stepping in and cursing something about cutting some flaws into Hurlin. He didn’t catch all of it but he did catch the hilt of a hand-axe as he kneed it up into the air from under the counter. The blade was into the Vallasaari’s jaw before the curse was over. After all their two peoples had been through, both together and apart, this was a sad state of affairs. But the elf-kin had no reason to suspect his jeweller was descended from the Wâdergård of Angaroth; best not to admit that kind of lineage. Those days were gone, the kingdom lost.
The psychopath left swiftly with his meagre reward. Not a bad outcome. Even better that the gem was clearly from dwarven ruins. Someone had found a way in. Hurlin’s kin would be very interested. Not so lost after all.
Solid.
Solid aS a
Rock
