THE COVENANT
A player’s guide to the monotheistic religion of the north
In memory of Rashar Starsword, Whose darts ruined the majesty
of many encounters
This is The Word of God
The Covenant is the keeper of his word.
From the Covenant it shall spread like His Ardent Flame
until it is spoken by all peoples.
So shall the world be made complete.
-An B’Aelathil Ch1. v1
Created by
Kevin McAvinchey Reprint 18/06/2024 to correct typo and update naming styles
Artwork
Cover Art - The Dedication by Edmund Blair Leighton
Symbaroum Artwork - for personal use only - (pages 6, 11, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 30, 50, 53) by Martin Grip
Artwork - personal use only - (pages 9, 13, 14, 23, 24 & 25, 32,& 33) by Kelvin Wilson, (page 8) Damian Bajowski, (page 10) Anna Podedworna, (page 17) Faouzi Hamida, (page18) Chenthooran Nambiarooran, (page 27) Darek Zabrocki, (pages 28 & 29) Jama Jurabaev,
(page 31) Even Amundsen, (page 34) John Howe, (page 36) Rasmus Berggreen, (page 37) Juan Pablo Roldan, (page 38) Vance Kovacs, (page 39) Bryan Sola, (page 40) Mohamed Gambouz, (page 41) Jose Daniel Cabrera Peña, (pages 42 & 43) Jeremy Paillotin, (page 45) Nemanja
Stankovic, (page 48) Irina Kovalova, (page 51) Mike Lim, (page 52) Eric Deschamps.
Royalty-free artwork - Cover as above, (page 35) Sailing Boats in the Mist by William Edward Norton, (Back Cover) Joan of Arc by John Everett Millais.
Templates by Nathanaël Barkles Roux /u/Barkalot
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master’s Guide, D&D Adventurers League, all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast.
©2016 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. Represented by Hasbro Europe, 4 The Square, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1ET, UK.
Contents
Author's Note 7
Player Guidance 7
Adventurers and Religion 7
Tithes 7
Chapter One: Faith 8
What is the Covenant? 8
One God - Many Divines 8
The Divines and their Religious Orders 9
Tolerated Sects 16
The Nessa 16
Rossan Pantheists 16
Heretical Sects 17
The Vindammari Pantheon 17
Baalphegorites 17
Divergent Druids - The Cernubi 18
Aeladdhan Theists 18
Chapter Two: Ministry of the Faith 20
The Sanctity of Aeladh's Flame 20
Calendar & Feast Days 21
Feasts 21
Hierarchy of the Covenant 24
The Orders Spiritual 24
The Noviserim 25
Serim 25
Aldserim 25
The Serimot 26
Osserim 26
Awensere 26
The Orders Militant 26
The Allegiant Guard 28
The Orders Secreto 29
The Keepers of the Word 29
Chapter Three: History of the Faith 30
The Mythic Era 30
The Rise of Man 33
The Trial of the North 36
The Aegir Kingdom 40
The Present Day 44
Chapter Four: Gifts of Faith 48
Agriculture Domain 48
Commerce Domain 49
Order Domain 49
Passions Domain 50
Travel Domain 51
Vigilance Domain 51
Zeal Domain 52
The Bias of the Narrator
This book is intended as a guide for players. The text is written to help players understand the mechanics of playing a Covenant cleric, how they may assist or oppose the party, and how they can be roleplayed. As the player is aware of the rules of the game, the opening chapter is written, for the most part, in the words of the Dungeon Master. However, in the roleplaying world, the descriptions of some Divines and much of Covenant history is written from the point of view of a devoted follower of the Covenant. This is how the Covenant is presented to the people, and to novitiate clerics. How much of this information turns out to be true is a matter of faith. Whilst encounters during a campaign will give a flavour of how the people view their god and his divines, only by delving deep into the legends will your character confirm matters of faith. That's a challenge for a whole campaign, if you want? It's up to you.
Author's Note
I finally bit the bullet and produced a piece describing a montheistic religion in a D&D setting. The research was good fun; the history of religions was inspiring. I got a head start from my own religious upbringing, which has gone on without me. None of the elements of this book are intended to cause offense to anyone of a religious persuasion, and likewise anyone who is not.
Player Guidance In Forodain, the peasant is aware of magic and daemons as dangerous forces to fear. Commonfolk trust their liege to protect them from mortal dangers, and their church to defend against spiritual harm. In Forodain, that church is the Covenant, and the one true god is Aeladh. Aeladh is the creator of everything they cherish, and his foes inhabit their greatest fears. This book describes the dominant religion of the north. It is essential reading for players of characters with faith in Aeladh and his Covenant, or holy characters which represents that faith, but its reference material adds flavour to any character.
The DM recommends all players of characters with knowledge of Forodain read Chapter One - The Faith. Players of cleric, druid, ranger, or paladin characters, or those who select religious proficiency, should also read Chapter Two – Ministry of The Faith.
In modern-day Western Europe, religion is an optional interest which is encouraged by the faithful but not mandated by society. We are free to have a religious life, but society is structured less and less around its traditions. This was not always the case. In Forodain, peasants, lords, and merchants alike organise themselves around worship and religious tradition. Atonement for sins, both of the elves and mankind, plays an important part of this tradition.
Adventurers and Religion Without reading all of this book, players should be aware how important religion is in a world where monsters are real. Characters should understand religion is part of daily life for almost everyone they meet. They may reject religion, the existence of one true god, or any gods at all. Their outlook should consider how to accommodate or confront those beliefs. Perhaps your character is faithful but rejects the Covenant's traditions and social pervasiveness? Or maybe they live a life of devotion to Aeladh? The Covenant's underlying altruism might be a good reason to fight for it, or to purge it of those who corrupt its ideals.
Adventurers, by their nature, live somewhat apart from society. They travel the land, win treasure, curry favour with local nobles, earn the trust of the peasantry, and get rich and powerful doing so. But a religious character should obey the customs of the church. Even if not religious, nearly all characters will be superstitious, for the simple reason that their superstitions have a basis in reality. So keeping in with the gods is high on most adventurers’ priorities. Here are some tips:
• Pray regularly, at both the beginning of the day, and at the end. What comes from the tuition of the Divines should also be recognised; food from The Peasant, laws from the Magister, family from the Mother, and so on.
• Waiting until observances are complete before departing on a quest. This will vary; most serious undertakings such as dispersing orc nests or leaving civilised lands to hunt a necromancer, is begun once a church service concludes. At this service, the community and Aeladh’s clerics bless the party.
• Asking for a blessing by a local cleric or lay pastor as you pass through the region is considered good manners.
• Being respectful of the dead. Most necromantic spells, including Speak With Dead, summon souls to answer questions or inhabit corpses. Using magic to bring the dead to life is not prohibited, but is worthy of atonement if required.
Tithes The Covenant requires tithes to maintain their possessions – lands, buildings, fighting and clerical servants. Tithes also symbolise homage to Aeladh. Parties must ensure that tithes, one-tenth of wealth won, are presented fairly to the nearest church once a party returns from treasure hunting, or to whichever church the treasure was dedicated. Avoiding tithes is an affront to both church and nobility, and both will punish it.
Regardless of fealty to Aeladh, adventurers cannot receive clerical healing without paying tithes. This is a basic requirement, and doesn’t cover the cost of a healing spell.
Finally, it’s important not to get too carried away with religious devotion. Not every action is “by the will of Aeladh”; invoking his name is an extreme statement and not used lightly. Of course, it’s more likely that a religious fanatic who praises Aeladh every few minutes will be treated as an idiot and simply ignored, especially when it comes to a share of treasure. ⛭
Chapter One: Faith
F
aith is powerful. In a world of dangerous and unseen forces, it can give strength to the weak, solace to the dying, and comfort to the oppressed. These things are true in any world, but in Forodain, where clerics can heal the dying, druidic spirits can make
crops grow, and angels themselves stand against evil, faith in an almighty god can mean life or death.
For most in Forodain, faith is their guide to understanding the world. Belief in Aeladh, how the world came to be, their place in it, and the promise of rewards in the afterlife, provides assurances to mortals. Clerics tell the story to each generation which provides that assurance, not only to give courage and comfort to the congregation, but also to ensure their safety in an organised society.
The following chapter provide the basic level of knowledge that most commoners of Forodain would have of the Covenant. But first of all, there is an important question to answer.
What is the Covenant?
The Covenant is the dominant religious organisation in the northern realms. It is monotheistic, based around belief in a single creator deity, known to commoners as Aeladh.
The Covenant is a church that spans almost all of the northern continent of the western world. It is founded
on the belief that the one true God, Aeladh, created the heavens and the earth. He first created the heavens and brought to life powerful beings known as the Divines, which inhabit that spiritual realm, to teach mortals and act as his intermediaries. With the passage of ages, the name of Aeladh was forgotten. Mankind put faith in the Divines, worshipped them as gods, and conflicted with each other over which was best. As the power of evil grew, Aeladh returned to mortal men and renewed his promise to them. This renewed covenant between mortals and their creator united the faiths of the north under the same roof. All, that is, but the outcast Baalphegor, who corrupted first the Elves, and then the Vindammari, in his aim to take the place of Aeladh.
One God - Many Divines The Covenant teaches that in the beginning, before Elves and Men, Aeladh created beings of tremendous power. They dwelt in the Itherium, and created works to venerate their Lord, as the faithful of Aeladh do nowadays. They revealed themselves, firstly to Elves, and then, through the Elves, to mankind. In the elder days, Elves and then men worshipped these powerful creatures as deities, and from this veneration their clerics were rewarded with powers. Despite the efforts of the Covenant, many peoples of Calenor, south of the Crimson Sea, still worship these creatures. However, the Covenant teaches us that, with a few exceptions, the Divines made no claims to godhood, but instead sought only to teach mortals of the creator through their works. And so it is today; the Divines are intermediaries
between mortal worshippers and Aeladh. Each one reveals a portion of the Aeladh’s wisdom and power. It is important to understand that the Divines themselves do not represent their portfolio in the way a Vindammari ‘deity’ might; Lore, The Scholar, has no more power over wisdom and lore than a farmer controls the rains. The Divines are teachers, which helps newcomers understand how, to their eyes, the Divine of Death can be petitioned alongside the Divine of farmers – an anathema to the Vindammari religion.
The Divines represent key aspects of Aeladh’s message to mortals. A petitioner will find a place to pray to each Divine in every chapel and certainly every church of the Covenant. Divines are represented in a variety of ways according to the local tradition; some have statues, others have wall-hung paintings, rich stained glass, or mosaics. Each depiction takes the form of a figure recognisable to mortals, and to mankind most
of all. It is common to find shrines devoted to Aeladh yet consecrated to a single Divine, through which prayers will flow to God.
Each Divine has an order of clerics who venerate Aeladh through the teaching of their patron. A cleric belongs to the religious order of their chosen Divine. Although they are learned in certain aspects of Aeladh's word above others, they can preach any of God's messages to the faithful.
But not all Divines are so benevolent, and not everyone recognises Aeladh as the creator. Heretical faiths lurk at the edges of civilisation. Of these, the most dangerous is Baalphegor the Corruptor. God himself named Baalpehgor as the Divine that stood opposed to his works. Baalphegor corrupted the ancient Elves, brought evil spirits to the world, and destroyed the Empire of Vindamaar in order to challenge Aeladh.
The Divines and their Religious Orders
A character can pray to Aeladh through any of his Divine aspects in any church. Any cleric of the Covenant can lead prayers. However, the order to which a cleric belongs can influence the way prayers are led and the outlook of the sermon taught. Most churches are consecrated to single orders, but in large churches priests of many orders may share the duties.
Members of religious orders must uphold the law of the church, and undertake to convert all mortals to worship of Aeladh. For most clerics, demonstration of Aeladh's gifts is enough to persuade, but others, convert at the point of a blade.
Clerics are subject to the laws of the land. A cleric cannot execute a suspected apostate without permission from the local lord. Lords temporal outrank those spiritual, but high ranking clerics can challenge the decisions of the lords of fiefs and knights of the manor, and place the nobility at odds with their vassals. This is further complicated as lands are awarded to soldiering clerics, granting the Covenant reassuring income, but blurring their ties of faith and vassalage together.
We continue with a summary of the Divines, and the clerics of the spiritual orders.
Devotion, The Maiden
Which teaches of Beauty, Love, and Song Passions Domain (See ‘New Domains’ in Chapter Four)
Devotion is the spirit of celebration, of passion, of bodily perfection, and of attraction. The Maiden is also known as the Messere when it responds to mortals as a male, although as a Divine it has any gender it chooses, or none at all. It offers guidance in a wide range of matters, all pertaining to taste and beauty; in the composition of a ballad, choosing a suitor, the correct moment to offer a marital proposal, or the appropriate form of words for a treaty. The Maiden brings advice from Aeladh on the appropriate veneration of heroes or events so that they do not descend into idolatry.
The Devoted Order
The Devoted are a wealthy and powerful order of clerics, which are closely tied with the upper echelons of society
across Forodain. They are patrons of the arts, and assist with the training of bards and skalds who wish to properly respect Aeladh. As well as their general pastoral duties, the Devoted take time to venerate Aeladh by producing works of art. These might be sculptures, mosaics, stained glass for the temples, or songs for the halls of pagan lords in far off lands.
The Devoted are tasked with guiding the commonfolk in matters of correct marital behaviour and to those embarking on courtship. Their greatest feasts are at weddings, particularly public weddings. In less civilised lands, the works of a cleric of this order can inspire the weak, give villagers comfort in dark times, or bring the word of Aeladh to the feast of a barbarian king.
Duty, The Knight
Which teaches of Chivalry, Honour, Duels, Soldiers, & War
War Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
Duty is a disciplined, stoic Divine called upon to mediate challenges of honour, respect, and martial conduct. It conveys the will of Aeladh in matters of proper conduct in battle, and correct behaviour of the victorious. The figure of the Knight is chosen to represent Duty. It teaches that correct action in the name of Aeladh is the path to virtue; a noble’s words and deeds can affect the lives of many vassals, whether through counsel of peace or a full-blooded call to arms.
The Honourable Order
The Honourable Order are the clerics and paladins of Duty. They act for the nobility as heralds, political advisors, soldiers, and quartermasters. The northern lands have desperate need of such gifts following the destruction of much land and civilisation by Baalphegor’s forces. The current purpose of the Honourable is to bring civility back to lands where barbarism and desperation currently hold sway.
Endeavour, The Bosun
Which teaches of the Travel, Envoys, Moon, Stars, Navigation, Oceans, & Seafaring
Travel Domain (See ‘New Domains’ in Chapter Four)
Endeavour is the guide of the Divines, who walks the unknown path and sails the improbable course. The Bosun represents Endeavour in the Covenant. Endeavour teaches mortals the mystery of Aeladh's world, and how offering prayer and searching for his signs in the moon and stars can reveal it.
Endeavour is the spirit of bold action. It answers petitions from merchants who must make perilous journeys, heralds who must venture into hostile lands, and children who step from their beds at night. The Bosun’s voice is powerful on the open road, the high seas, or on an outcropping that overlooks new lands. Endeavour can show the correct path, or provide a moment of inspiration that makes the meeting of strangers a friendly one.
The Order of the Bosun
Clerics of Endeavour are an independent group. The Order of the Bosun gives them a place to rest, mutual recognition, and a source of valuable geographical knowledge on their travels. Clerics of the order keep maps, sea charts, and even astronomical calculations, by which they can guide the commonfolk. They are intrepid explorers, enthusiastically mapping the land, sea, and underworld, to better understand the majesty of Aeladh. Here and there in the wilderness, a lost traveller might see a symbol of the Bosun, and look to it for safe passage, or perhaps toward an amazing discovery.
More militant clerics take up arms against evil shape-changers, agents of the Corruptor who use the moons of Aeladh to spread their evil curse throughout the land.
Ferocity, The Exile
Which teaches of Forests, Natural Destruction, Storms, and Wild Animals
Tempest Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
Ferocity is the spirit of the wilderness, represented by the lurking Exile. The Exile sits on the fringe of the Covenant, representing a spirit that was almost corrupted by Baalphegor against Aeladh. But Ferocity was a lover of beasts and the wild forests, and it could not abide their corruption by the Defiler. Misunderstood by some as a spirit to be feared, Ferocity instead teaches mortals the danger of Aeladh’s world. In the rumble of thunder or the glare of a charging bull, The Exile is present, teaching Aeladh’s lessons of sharp wits in the face of danger, and the readiness to fight or flee. Petitioners to the Exile seek guidance on physical dangers, or dangers to family life, and how to avoid or guard against them. It is petitioned by young warriors, who yearn to understand how to focus their exuberance, and of hunters, who must face into the dangerous world.
The Exiled Order
Clerics of The Exile find their place at the edges of civilisation, and form a somewhat looser order than others. They know one another through inscribed hunter’s marks in their local lands. Exile Clerics give their service freely and in good humour, despite their lonesome reputations. They place their pastoral and defensive abilities at the disposal of remote communities or where a dangerous natural feature, or even creature, dominates.
The Exile and his Clerics have an excellent relationship with Druids. Ferocity represents the wild aspect of Aeladh’s natural world, opposite that of the Peasant. However, profane Cernubas and his heretics profess to represent all of nature, rejecting Aeladh as the creator at the edges of civilsation. Therefore, Clerics of the Exile are often first to encounter these apostates and take the lead in purging them from the area.
Glammer, The Peddler
Which teaches of Trade and Merchants.
Commerce Domain (See ‘New Domains’ in Chapter Four)
The Peddler represents Glammer, the spirit of trade and mutual benefit among mortals. Glammer is a generous spirit, responding subtly as often as needed and through as many caravans as will offer prayer to Aeladh. It teaches that the best deal is one with Aeladh’s blessing, and the best fortune amassed is one that respects first Aeladh and then each other.
Merchants and sea captains alike call upon the Peddler to intercede in trade on both land and sea. and the Peddler is prayed to by those who find themselves at the mercy of barbarian peoples. At home, those who require guidance on the fairness of a trade, or the potential danger of investments often beseech Glammer at church.
The Respectful Order of the Peddler
The Peddler is Aeladh’s arbiter of trade. As such, his clerics of the Respectful Order tend to be most active in settlements along trading routes, sometimes in place of market inspectors. A Respectful cleric decides trade disputes, or evaluate the correct tithes for a lord or sere if no lay arbiter is present.
The Respectful Order’s activities are usually peaceful, but they take up arms in the protection of trading settlements. Caravans and merchant ships pay well for a cleric accompany them. As such, the militant branches of the Order are among the wealthiest, and keen to use that wealth to wield influence within the Covenant.
Whilst not on missionary work, clerics who preach the guidance of the Peddler assist those embarking on long journeys. They have knowledge of trade customs in far-flung regions, and often have knowledge of useful languages.
Guile, The Shadow
Which teaches of Secrecy, Spies, Thieves, Trickery, & Assassins
Trickery Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
Guile instructs mortals on covert influence, wits, and the art of opposing greater strength with greater skill in the service of Aeladh. It is represented in the Covenant by the Shadow. In many churches, this is simply an unlit area, sheltered by a covering or a pillar.
The Shadow is asked to intercede by those who live by surreptitious or shrewd means. A royal spy offers a small devotion each day so that their cover stays intact, a rebel soldier that they might be safe in their mountain hideout, and a child that they might surprise a returning parent.
The Shrouded Order
Clerics of The Shadow are a semi-cloistered sect. They are distinctive in that they wear hoods at all times, save when speaking as confessor, and this symbolises their unique role as trustworthy confidants and counsellors.
This role is a difficult one, and no records can be kept of any tidings until the cleric themselves confide
in their senior. Once confided, and if deemed sufficiently important, the secret can be added to a text kept in the vaults of the Shadowed Hall in Sedeberg. A cleric of the Shrouded Order might undertake tasks that require more subterfuge than a cleric of other orders, but they are formidable warriors in defense of those who must remain hidden, or secrets that must be protected.
Hope, The Mother
Which teaches of Birth, Dawn, Mercy, Peace, and The Blessed Mother
Life Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
In the beginning, and at the end, when there is little else, there is hope. As the clerics of ancient Vindammar fled from the God-king in the south, they took the embers of their Ardent Flame, the spirit of Aeladh, in hope of a new and better life. Upon little else was faith in Aeladh kindled. Hope is this spirit
of Aeladh’s promise to mortals. It is the pillar of mortality, when, in fading years,
despair might otherwise reign. Hope is the promise of youth, the nurturing of new life,
and rising to adult-hood. Hope is among the strongest divines, and assumed into itself the
soul of the Mother of Aegas The Blessed. She
represents Hope in the Covenant.
Petitioners to Hope seek renewal of their lives, their prosperity, their lands, or their way of life. And in that hope, although it might be won through conflict, many petition for peace to prosper.
The Merciful Order of the Mother
Clerics of the Mother form the Merciful Order. It is a pastoral order, and is the largest order of the Covenant, drawing to it those who simply hope for better. It uses this influence to moderate the more radical arms of the church. Despite their peaceful tenets, they are not pacifists. Like other clerics, they are armed to defend their settlements and their faith, as a lioness defends her cubs. Clerics of the order hear devotions to Aeladh on the birth of new children, the passing to adulthood, and the passing of authority from elders in their later days. They also oversee the ringing of bells to see in the new day, and mark the anniversary of peace treaties within their lands. Unique among clerics, The Merciful Order specialise in counselling matriarchs on appropriate duties, behaviour, and household order.
Lore, The Scholar
Which teaches of Knowledge, Inspiration, and the spirit of Brede the Blessed
Knowledge Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
Kings, scholars, and clerics alike bring offerings to Aeladh at the shrines of Lore on account of its wisdom, but also in memory of the achievements of Brede, who enscribed the pages of An B’Aelathil. This text is the written testament of Aeladh, and is the foundation of the Covenant. It is depicted as the Scholar.
Petitioners to The Scholar seek answers to mysteries beyond their reckoning. But Lore is not a font of facts or advice, responding with wisdom and insight to impart a better understanding the world. Clerics of The Scholar understand that achieving perspective and reason is more valuable than any single solution. Lore draws from the source of all knowledge, from the creator of knowledge itself. As such, Lore is not worshipped as a holy bringer of knowledge, but as an intermediary. The Scholar teaches mankind to understand themselves so that they might ask the right questions to better understand Aeladh.
The Learned Order
The clerics devoted to The Scholar are The Learned Order. They are a cloistered sect, devoted to the preservation of knowledge and the education of the people. As such, they often tend great libraries of texts, galleries of artwork, and vaults of hidden artifacts. However, even among these introverted brethren, some are tasked to go out into the world to seek great works, unearth rumoured texts, or secure dark materials from those who might misuse them.
Majesty, the Sovereign
Which teaches of Law, Nobility, and the spirit of Aegas The Blessed.
Order Domain (See ‘New Domains’ in Chapter Four)
Majesty is the Divine spirit which intercedes for Aeladh in matters of law, justice, and to guide the nobility in their duties. Majesty sits alongside the spirit of
Aegas the Blessed, after the hallowed king who was elevated to the Itherium following his death. Majesty is represented by The Sovereign in Covenant chapels.
Aegas laid the foundations for the Covenant and is revered is many of the lands in which it ministers. He destroyed the aberrant Meargha and banished their army back to Conir, ending two centuries of fearful rule. He sits alongside the spirit of Majesty, answering the prayers of those who seek guidance on matters of lordship in all forms; a lord might seek guidance on how to be fair on his manor, as much as a householder might need guidance on how to treat an unexpected pregnancy of his daughter. Majesty seeks to help those who must exercise power.
The Order of the Sovereign
The Order of The Sovereign, The Aegir, form Majesty’s clerical order. This order is small but devoted, and exercises great influence in the courts of the north. They welcome the oaths of countless lords and knights. As such, their militant orders are strong for such a small clerical devotion, and comprise a significant minority of the Allegiant Guard. Helpfully, the Aegir are based in Egel, where the Allegiant Guard are headquartered.
A cleric of the Sovereign is expected to exercise discretion to assist good rulership, and offer advice and insight to those that must make important decisions. This includes offering help to the commonfolk, and advising them how best to maintain their communities. Day to day activities include leading prayers by the people for their lords, and that the rule of law is applied fairly. Many clerics are also heralds, family historians, or envoys for local nobles.
Repose, The Fallen.
Which teaches of Death and The Dead
Grave Domain (see ‘Xanathar’s Guide to Everything’)
Repose is Aeladh’s gatekeeper of the afterlife; a just and impartial advisor to the living, to prepare them for the end of their days, and not a figure to be feared. It is an intercessor for those who wish peace for the soul of a deceased loved-one, and safe passage through the afterlife. It is also a figurehead for those who carry out the will of Aeladh against the abomination of undeath.
Order of the Fallen
The clergy of Repose are organised into the Order of the Fallen. They are prevalent in all regions, primarily the settled or urban areas of Forodainn. They oversee the last moments of the dying; praying through petitions to their patron to watch for the approach of the passing soul. In this world of ever-creeping evil, the Fallen are often armed in the service of their faith. Malevolent
spirits of the Itherium can manifest at even the passing of a simple commoner. They hold vigils at mass-graves, battlefields, or sites of catastrophes, blessing the land where the passing of so many souls has weakened the barrier between the material world and the Itherium.
The largest feast day for the Order of the Fallen is the mid-autumnal Lament of the Fallen, which recollects the Convergence perpetrated by the elves, which brought the spirits of the Itherium into the mortal world. The ages that followed required vigilance of the servants of Aeladh, to ensure safe passage for the souls of the dead, and to ensure the safety of the living.
Repose’s symbol is the silver skull. Many of its devotees carry miniature skulls on necklaces or beads. Clerics emblazon their weapons, breviaries, or armour, with the silver skull. It is frowned-upon to carry the skull of a creature that once lived, however the bones of fallen saints or heroes are said to grant great power to a Fallen cleric, and reliquaries holding them are favoured by the order.
Talent, The Wright
Which teaches of Artifice and Crafts
Forge Domain (see ‘Xanathar’s Guide to Everything’)
Talent is the spirit of Aeladh’s practical gifts to mortals. Of all things mortals possess that spirits of the Itherium desire, it is to shape the world around them in the image of their maker. Aeladh’s desire is that his mortal children use their gifts to bring his message to the world. The Wright represents Talent who teaches that all craft, nomatter how simple, can enlighten the world with Aeladh’s word.
The light of Aeladh that burns in the heart of mortals drives them to take up tools and craft their mark upon the world. Those who call upon Talent are the frustrated smith, who yearns to make the perfect item for their lord, the sculptor, who asks for Aeladh to guide their hand and keep their wits sharp, and the seamstress who prays that her handicrafts will please or sell.
The Order of the Wright
The order of clerics devoted to Talent is known as the Order of the Wright. These clerics wear their coat of arms proudly on arms and armour often wrought by their own hands - often among the best available. They can be found accompanying antiquarians into dark, hidden places, in search of precious metals, rare materials, or rumours of instructive texts, and alongside armoured knights to demonstrate their strength of arms.
Toil, The Peasant
Which teaches of Agriculture, Farmers, Gardeners, Hardship, and Husbandry.
Agriculture Domain (See ‘New Domains’ in Chapter Four)
The Peasant guides mortals in the ways of turning the wilderness into civility through hard work in the pasturelands. The Peasant represents the spirit of Toil in the chapels of the Covenant.
Toil is an elder Divine, perhaps the same spirit that taught the elves to work the fields and tend animals, but it is hard to tell; Toil does not answer petitions of academic nature, only those that relate to the cultivation of the land. Toil speaks up to Aeladh for the labourer in the fields, taking their petitions of simple virtue to him in their times of need. A churl might offer a small prayer that their lords’ crops are free from disease, the ackerman that their plough can produce a good yield for the manor, and a climmer might whisper an offering while inspecting the nest they earlier prayed to find.
Toil and Ferocity represent different portions of the world; whereas Ferocity guides mortals who dwell on the edge of civilisation, Toil brings their offerings to Aeladh once civility has taken hold. Neither sect has any love for Cernubas or his followers, who reject Aeladh.
The Humble Order
Clerics of The Peasant are part of an extensive order that holds honesty, hardwork, tradition, and civility as their prime virtues. The Humble order administers in many of the lowland pastoral and hillside farmlands of the north, helping to maintain local farming traditions, feast days, and good cheer among the labouring folk.
Humble clerics take up flail and shield as readily as the ox-cart in defence of their communities.
Valour, The Huntsman
Which teaches of Strength, Athletics, Endurance,
and Courage
Zeal Domain (See ‘New Domains’ in Chapter Four)
Valour is the spirit that inspires mortals to do what Aeladh requires, regardless of the danger. It teaches mankind that
strength of body and mental fortitude are powerful weapons against the darkness, and that courage and courageous deeds can inspire others to fight back against oppression.
Valour is represented in the Covenant by the Huntsman.
The Hunstman brings the prayers of mortals who devote their action to the care of
Aeladh, trusting in god for their success. It is the prayer
of the knight who leads the charge into battle, the gladiator who steps out into the arena, and the child who stops the unjust blow of an elder and says, no more. The petitions of humans are of particular interest to Valour. Their mortality is the ultimate price for bravery, and such bravery is the sign of Aeladh’s Ardent Flame that burns in the heart of all man-kind.
The Undaunted Order
Valour’s clerics are a militant organisation first and foremost. They are the foundation of orders of paladins and knights in the service of Aeladh, but all owe their allegiance to the Undaunted. Clerics of the Huntsman stand readily alongside those of the Knight, the Sovereign, and the Watchman, to advise on judicious use of bold action to solve a problem. They are present on the battlefield to rouse soldiers, and in civilised lands to guard against complacency of body or mind.
Clerics in peacetime arrange local tourneys, oversee hunts, and keep a ready sword arm as a symbol of courage to inspire others.
Veracity, The Magister
Which teaches of The Sun, Truth, and Vengeance.
Light Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
Veracity is the incorruptible spirit of Aeladh’s truth and vengeance. In ancient days the spirit went by the pagan name of Belubas. The Magister represents Veracity in the Covenant, often depicted as a tall, robed man.
The Magister receives petitions from those who have suffered wrongs, by those who require its courage to pursue powerful criminals, and by those who seek guidance on the most appropriate form of revenge. Veracity’s influence is to be found in clemency for the weak, as well as severity to the wicked.
Veracity carries Aeladh’s divine light to the dark places of the world, arming its clerics to assault the strongholds of evil, particularly undead lairs.
The Order of the Magister
Veracity’s clergy are at the forefront of the Covenant’s efforts to fight evil where is lies. The Order of the Magister are a crusading military faction, and its clerics go in search of rumoured lairs, or to those who blaspheme against Aeladh. Besides their pastoral duties, they are sought out by petitioners who might wish to seek vengeance against an offender. A cleric can personally take up the vendetta, provided other options are exhausted.
Vigil, The Watchman
Which teaches of Darkness, The Dawn, Watchmen and Shepherds.
Light Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
Vigil is Aeladh’s messenger of warning and readiness, represented by lantern-bearing figure of the Watchman. The spirit was known by pagans as Adh-in-Bha, the forgotten Carcaddi god of wolves, and also a once-blasphemous expression for numb limbs.
The Watchman gives solace to those facing darkness, not only a comfort but assistance to prepare for dark times. Vigil teaches that with preparation of mind and body, of community and mutual sacrifice, in the
service of Aeladh, hardship can be over-come. He is the guardian in the night, looking over children in their sleep, and teaching mortals not to fear the unknown but to sharpen their wits upon it.
The Vigilant Order
The Vigilant are those clerics of Aeladh who promote the tuition of The Watchman. They are a militarily active order, who count many paladins and soldiers among their number. They offer counsel to those with trouble
approaching, and those who may soon endure fearful times. The Vigilant station missionaries at the borders of the kingdoms, and send envoys to pagan lands so that the boundaries of the unknown are pushed back.
Tolerated Sects
The Covenant was joined as part of an evolution of the beliefs of people in the north. As such, it was up to the clerics and missionaries of Aeladh to convince the folk of the righteous path.
Despite that, allowances were made to include many faithful in the congregation, who might otherwise still be lost to pagan ways. It is the ambition of every preacher to develop mankind's understanding of Aeladh so that they fully feel the warmth of the Ardent Flame.
The Nessa Derived from the geographical region to the north and west of Hart, the Nessa came late to the Covenant, summoned by the Mother of Aegas to the council of Awen in 860CR. The Nessa accept the majority of An B’Aelathil, but reject that Vindammari-era clerics rescued the Embers of the Ardent Flame, or that such a flame was part of the mortal world. For such a thing to exist, they say, Aeladh would need to be physically present on the mortal world, which, to them at least, is blasphemy.
Practically, this means the Nessan orders to not permit their clerics to go on pilgrimage to Vindammari borderlands, nor participate in crusades against Baalphegor in those lands. They are also forbidden to join parties that seek the embers, or any that carry symbols of the Ardent Flame, unless accepting it is a creative contrivance of An B’Aelathil.
Rossan Pantheists Pantheists rejected the authority of Egel over the Serirmot, as a direct result of its support for King Ellard and his restoration to the throne in 906CR. The schism
of both faith and crown resulting from the killing of Aegas the Blessed was a defining moment for the north. The restoration of Ellard to the throne was a betrayal of the principles of the young religion. The betrayal was made worse by the fate of Sengil and Ellards’ abandonment of its defence in 897CR. The church in that city withdrew its support for the Serirmot which chose Ellard as its figurehead.
Most importantly, Pantheists do not recognise the divine aspect of The Sovereign, instead recognising Blessed Aegas as the inheritor of Majesty. There are slight liturgical divergences, but the main articles of faith are identical to those of The Sovereign. The same inheritance transposes the Blessed Mother of Aegas onto the tenets of the Egellant Divine of Hope.
Practically, Pantheist clerics do not send envoys to the Serirmot, nor adhere to its interpretations of faith. However, the Sengir Patriarch and his Exarchs will often form similar conclusions to those at Egel, so doctrine does not significantly diverge.
Whereas supplicants of Aeladh may worship anywhere, no clerics of the Egellant Orders are welcome to preach in Rossa, whether it be Sengil or the Rossa Coast. However, Egel still extends permission for Pantheist clerics to preach in other sanctuaries and chantries, provided they do not promote their divergent beliefs.
Adherent Druids Since before Aegas, before the Vindammari liturgical union, and before the fall of Vindammar, were the druids. This ancient sect of seers who focused on the natural world proved dangerous to the Vindammari clerics who came before Aegas. Indeed they proved dangerous to every conquering force that encountered
them; the Ulla Conir found them an implacable foe, and the Aegan bannermen found themselves waylaid from druidic territory as they liberated the north.
At the core of druidic faith is the centrality of the living world. This means they do not believe in the Itherium, nor the heavens. They believe that there are only the spirits of the natural world, which become corrupted through contact with agents of evil. The adherent druidic circles accept that Aeladh created the world, and that his Divines teach mankind how to live good lives. But they do not accept that Divines, or even Elves, dwell in another realm, or are immortal. Even Aeladh exists as part of the living world; and only by defending the living world, and encouraging its prosperity, can his divinity be upheld, and his will fulfilled.
Heretical Sects
Beyond the teaching of the Covenant, and beyond even tolerated divergences of interpretation, are the heretics. In some cases, a liturgical interpretation by the sect puts them beyond acceptance by the Serirmot, whereas in others, the central figure of their worship is either directly or indirectly opposed to the Covenant itself. Broadly, the entire Vindammari pantheon falls into this group.
The Vindammari Pantheon The pre-Aegan faith is still surprisingly resilient in the borderlands of the north, and clerics who espouse the old ways still step off trade vessels on northern shores. Their faiths are unwelcome in the lands of the Covenant, and proseltysing carries severe penalties.
The Covenant denies Vindammari clerics entry to all churches, shrines, and sanctuaries. Their symbols are not to be worn when abroad in the north, nor are their books. The Covenant aims to spread the word of Aeladh so that it is spoken by the whole world. All mortals cannot speak the word when Vindammari clerics peddle their falsehoods.
In practical terms, unless a cleric of, for example, Manaan or Djan-Rai is able to find a suitable temple, they cannot advance in power. They still receive their clerical powers - one assumes because their mortal pleas are heard sympathetically by Aeladh despite their misplaced loyalties – but any display of such power is likely to attract the attention of the Covenantal orders.
Baalphegorites In extreme cases, the heretical religion not only denies the power of the Divines and the authority of the Covenant, but also deny the existence of Aeladh himself. Worst of all is Baalphegor, a creature who seeks the destruction of Aeladh, and whose followers oppose heaven itself.
Baalphegor
Which spreads Fear, Disease, and Corruption
Death Domain (see ‘Dungeon Masters Guide’)
Baalphegor is known as the Accursed, as Baalphegor the Corruptor, and as the Daemon King.
Baalphegor is the Divine which stands against everything wrought by Aeladh. He is not a deity. Baalphegor is simply the strongest of the divergent Divines who sought to reveal themselves and their power to the Elves, and assume mastery over them. Baalphegor led the Elves to link the Itherium to the mortal world, and so bring great peril to the world in an attempt to unseat the creator. He worked his task in the shadows, and so into the shadows he was cast by Aeladh as the great foe of the Elves. In later ages, whispered promises to the lords of Vindammar led them to destroy their own civilisation as they summoned the form of Baalphegor to the mortal world, corrupting the land evermore. But the mortal world reveals the extent of The Corruptor’s power, as a creature that can be both destroyed and defeated.
The Order of the Fly
The clergy of the Corruptor are driven by personal ambition and a hatred of Elvenkind. Baalphegor promises great wealth and personal power to his servants, who are raised from the downtrodden peoples of his own domain. It is their task to spread fear, despair, and division among the free peoples of the world to enrich the power of their patron. The followers of Baalphegor believe their master is locked in a war with heaven itself, against the creator, which, of course, is nothing but vanity; as a worm might war with a king. The faithful of Aeladh can discern these clerics are merely tools for his disposal, driving the less-fortunate slaves and orcish soldiers before them, ever fearful of Baalphegor’s pet daemons whom he trusts more than any mortal.
The symbol of Baalphegor among his followers is the a black hand with palm outward. Although initially inscribed as a warning of Baalphegorite activity in the area, his clerics have also adopted the fly head motif as their symbols. Needless to say, any such inscriptions sighted are to be reported.
Divergent Druids - The Cernubi The late adherence of many druidic circles was remarkable in light of their often-demonstrated independence from civilised religion. But adherence was not universal. Some druids still do not accept that the god of mortals could be the figure claimed in An B’Aelathil. As such, they are openly hostile to all agents of the Covenant, and harness their powers to defend their lands from further incursion.
Practically, most followers of the druidic faith are worshippers of their powerful pagan spirit Cernubas. However, where isolated enclaves of Cernubas have become more settled, their shrines are tended by clerics.
Cernubas
With blasphemous tales of Wild Nature, Fertility, and the Living
Tempest or Nature Domain (see ‘Players Handbook’)
A vile and misbegotten faith. The heretical followers of Cernubas do not acknowledge the power of Aeladh and persist with faith in their ‘horned god’. Cernubas is the fickle spirit of the earth, who watches over the living, including mortal men and animals. In dark times past, his worship was popular among the pagans. Late at night they undertook revelry around pyres in the midst of night. The brothers Meargha found the Cernubi to be ruthless opponents, yet they proved to be no ally of Aegas either, as he returned Aeladh’s light to the north.
The faithful of Cernubas witness that their god is a protector of all things, but that nature exists in a cycle of life and death which no man may stop, and no creator ever began. Life always strives to exist.
There are few, if any, clerics of Cernubas. Indeed, there are no known chapels to the pagan abomination. Shrines have been found in wooded glades, atop mountains, in deepest caves, swamps, and even underwater. Needless to say, any chapels, shrines, or
other devotions to the ‘Horned Hunter’ are destroyed by Aeladh’s champions once discovered.
As any faith that denies the existence of Aeladh has no place in the world, and as such, the Cernubi pagans are anathema to the Covenant. Following the initial purges of Aegas, the Cernubi have shown little appetite for conflict, and their pagan ways are currently in retreat across the land. Despite the growth of the Covenant over recent decades, in the face of Baalphegor’s attack, rumours persist of isolated Cernubi enclaves, which the faithful struggle to stamp out.
Cernubas’ symbol is a pair of stag antlers placed before a crescent representing the moon Aurendel. This is often simplified to a circle with an upturned crescent above, commonly scrawled as a warning sign in areas of the pagans’ power.
Aeladdhan Theists Among the more insidious threats to the Covenant, and the divine right of the kings in the north, are the isolated sects who believe in the divinity of Aeladh, but deny what is written in An B’Aelathil. While this is not widespread, it is less public, and considerably more dangerous to civilised rule.
Denial of the authority of An B’Aelathil has the implication that Aegas was not divinely-appointed, and therefore did not derive his authority from Aeladh. In that case, the heirs of Aeladh had no divine claim either. The spiritual assumption of Aegas, or his Mother, is also disputed, which brings into doubt the existence of Divines at all. Some Theists accept that powerful spirits exist that also worship Aeladh, but as they do not require intermediaries, then why should humans? In the eyes of the Covenant, who hold An B’Aelathil to be a sacred text inscribed by men directly from the voice of god, such views are anathema.
Practically, Theists are a secretive sect, offering havens to fugitives, who share in their rebellious and heretical beliefs, from local rulers. Their teachings are, needless to say, not welcome in the sanctuaries and churches of the Covenant, where their blasphemy is a serious offence. Early Theists suffered terrible and public executions, but became martyrs of their faith in the process. Therefore, contemporary Theists are starved to death in cells deep within the Covenantal prisons. ⛭
T
his chapter provides further detail on the Covenant for players of faithful characters so they can understand what the Covenant expects of them, and the message they should spread to the unconverted. It expands significantly on the history of the
church, using as its basis the accounts of Blessed Brede in the sacred liturgical text ‘An B’Aelathil’.
A section is dedicated to the feasts and hierarchy of the Covenant. This explains the clerical structure of the church from the lowest lay members to the Awensere and the ruling Serirmot. Besides the clerical order, this section introduces the orders militant and the order secreto, both essential to maintaining the power and influence of the church.
The Sanctity of Aeladh's Flame
The church teaches that Aeladh is the one true God, and all other purported gods are merely powerful spirits of his creations Aeladh created the Divines from the Itherium, and distilled the Elves from these Divine spirits. Aeladh created the mortal realm, the earth, and placed the Elves upon it. The Elves learned, through the misguided tuition of Baalphegor, of a path to immortality, but at the cost of their dominance over the mortal realm.
By fusing together the mortal and immortal realms, the Elves caused spirits of the Itherium to cross over and dwell within the earth. These beings from the immortal realm endured for longer than the creatures of the earth, and travelled far across and beneath it. Some grew powerful and vengeful of their entrapment in the mortal world.
Mankind was not one of these spirits. Mankind came from the earth itself, borne by the world Aeladh had made. Aeladh gave mankind speech and wisdom, putting his flame within them. They were mortal, but possessed of an immortal soul wrought directly by Aeladh. For this reason The Covenant teaches that mankind are the chosen people to restore Aeladh's glory.
Aeladh’s word, in An B’Aelathil, explains that the bodies of men are mortal and from the mortal realm. But it says that the immortal spark of Aeladh returns to Aeladh. In this way, the souls of humans, which give life to their mortal bodies, are sacred. Aeladh reaffirms this offering to every human at birth, and humans return their flame back to Aeladh at death.
At birth the soul passes from the immortal to mortal realm, pure and free from sins. But even a pure soul attracts corrupting spirits, jealous of mankind, which try to break between realms. And at the moment of death, the spirits of the Itherium, having watched the mortal soul for its whole life, await to waylay as it passes back from mortal world to the Itherium. Others are eager to reach the mortal world as the soul passes back.
Chapter Two: Ministry of the Faith
Therefore, the church teaches it is wise to guard against the malevolent spirits at the point of birth or death.
Human life is sacred due to its connection to Aeladh. But respect for Aeladh requires a respect for all his works, including the lives of other races. The Covenant teaches that all life comes from Aeladh, although not so privileged as mankind.
Elves are regarded with contempt and suspicion by followers of the Covenant, and for good reason. Elves brought sin into the mortal and immortal realms. in their lust for immortality they breached the Itherium and tainted the each with the other. They sundered their own peoples to retain their power, and later spilled the blood of their kin and cast them out. This First Sin broke their bond with Aeladh. It spilled mortal blood in the immortal realm, and gave its inhabitants a taste for mortal life, birthing a malevolence that poses a danger to all Aeladh’s children. It is unheard of to meet an Ilantha Elf in our world, but they have no love of Aeladh, and deserve the condemnation of his peoples.
The Vallasaari are different. Their loyalty to God deserves the respect of Aeladh’s faithful. But whilst they still remember the faith of their ancient kin, they pose a threat to humans who trespass on their lands, and do not share the same reverence for Aeladh’s creations that men do. That they retain the animistic tradition of their forebears is too significant a divergence to be permitted within the lands of the Covenant.
The church has no such position for Half-Elves, who remain extremely rare in the north. The Covenant believes that Half-Elves are the saviours of the Elven race, mingling with humans so remove the taint of the Convergence and First Sin.
Dwarven religious teaching is forbidden in Covenantal buildings, although Dwarves are treated sympathetically by the faithful. Their belief that souls return to the earth after death is too significant a divergence for the church to allow spread. However, the Dwarrow were subject to harsh treatment under the Ulla Conir, and fought bravely alongside Blessed Aegas as he crossed Heath and Hart. They are regarded as steadfast allies of the church. Significant numbers of Dwarven warriors converted to the Covenant following the battle of Melan’s Ford.
Halflings and Gnomes accept the church’s teaching as readily as humans, but generally don’t take it as seriously as humans. They do not believe in souls or spirits which pass from mortal to immortal realms, only that life is short on this earth. The church sees them as frivolous or indulgent, and not really worth the time or effort to convert.
Orcs are the corruption of mortals by the dark arts of Baalphegor. As such they are the foes of the church wherever they are encountered. However, Half-Orcs, like Half-Elves, may possess immortal souls gifted by Aeladh. Clerics are encouraged to help these creatures onto Aeladh’s path; many proud Half-Orc warriors serve in the orders militant.
Tieflings are pitied by the church. Their reverence for Aeladh prompts these spirits to take the place of a human soul. Although this is their nature, the act deprives a human of life, and Tieflings are normally cast out from their families and communities without church opposition. However, their nature also provides a useful source of interest for church scholars, and some undertake roles within the church, so long as they repent their sin of birth.
Calendar & Feast Days
Blessed Brede’s early works on the cosmology, which charted paths of the sun and both moons Aurendel and Earendel, revisits works from ruined Vindammar. Both agree on the standard calendar of a year based on the turn of seasons and visible, repetitive annual patterns.
Each year is comprised of four equal seasons, which are each composed of three months. Each month has twenty-eight days, formed of four, equal, seven-day weeks. Months and days carry names from days of yore, many simply convenient for commoners to remember from their myths, and many simply named after the rural cycle.
Feasts Shield Meet occurs at the end of winter. It is a hallowed date for both commoner and king, because it heralds every common soldier’s formal offering to defend the realm in time of conflict. It is also a festival that brings together the various mercenary companies to agree terms of employment, terms of non-aggression, promotions, and recruitment of new members.
The day often begins early, and in pre-arranged locations in the north, which change each year, aside from a few permanent festival locales like those of the major cities. Soldiers and companies of mercenaries will march through the land of the feast in the morning, partake in a ritual and make their offerings to Aeladh at
midday, attended upon by the Honourable Order, and then continue to a feasthall or encampment for the afternoon of revelry. It is not uncommon for agreements made in the morning to be broken by the same night.
Sowing is a festival at the culmination of the new crop planting. This is at the end of winter. In lands with established manors, it takes place at the end of planting the lord’s crops, and marks the beginning of planting the fields of common land. Clerics of The Peasant and of the Mother assist by overseeing and blessing the crops in the hope of Aeladh’s good fortune.
Fairwinds takes place at the beginning of summer. This marks the beginning of the safe passage season on both land and sea. It is attended by the heads of merchant guilds, travellers, and ambassadors in the hope of safe journeys, happy tidings, and good profits. In coastal settlements they meet by the harbourside, inland settlements at the market square, and rites are overseen by clerics of Endeavour and Glammer. Fairwinds is delayed in some towns to coincide with the completion of a new ship, which is blessed as part of the festivities.
Laments is a holy period lasting for two or three days of the year, and marks when neither moons Earendel and Aurendel are in the night sky, casting the deepest of nights across the land. Clerics of both the Shrouded and Fallen Orders mark the occasion. Clerics of The
Shouded oversee and consecrate secret pacts during this time, and it is an occasion when powerful people are on their guard for those who would depose them from the shadows. As a result, it is also a period of celebrating among the commoners, who are given presents or a great feast by their wary lords in respect of their service.
On the evening of the second night of Laments, the clerics of the Fallen Order mark the Elder Convergence and travel in numbers to the sites of battlefields, blood sacrifices, or catastrophes. This is a night known as The Passing. Here they reconsecrate the land, remember those who died, and defend against incursions where creatures of the Itherium press hard against the mortal world.
As Laments is a lunar feast, it occurs twice a year at a different time. This can coincide with other feasts, which respect the solemnity of the occasion by waiting until the following week. Rarely, Laments occurs three times in a year. The third occurrence of Laments is seen as a time of dire portents.
First Rising occurs at the beginning of Summer, which commonly marks the touring season for royals in the civilised lands of the north. It marks the induction of inquisitors and royal justices, who tour the land on behalf of the monarch to hear of and judge upon high crimes. Clerics of The Magister take charge of the feast and oversee the induction of justices or hear petitions from parties who suffered crimes. But as the Order of the Magister is usually in larger communities, poor or isolated villagers must travel for these feasts, and can require protection on the roads.
During this time, parties of the faithful make efforts to seek out criminals who have long-evaded justice. In lands ruled by abusive lords, it is also an occasion for revolts led by those whom the lord has declared criminals.
The Open Field is the largest feast of the spring season in civilised lands. It is the feast of Majesty. Clerics of the Order of the Sovereign lead great tournaments among the nobility during which the reigning monarch customarily beknights freemen or loyal soldiers among the fluttering banners of the royalty. Lords are given lands during this time in respect of their long service, and the jousting or foot lists of the tourneys give young warriors a chance to be noticed by their liege lords.
Greening takes place when the first blossoms of the orchards open in mid-spring, as the season turns warmer and brighter. Clerics of the Peasant will inspect orchards, livestock, and crops of their faithful, identifying which families have had poor fortune, and petitioning to their neighbours, lord, or abbot to make allowances from their own yields in time of plenty. Greening is also a brewing feast, as it marks the end of the fermentation of meads and ales. As such it is a time of optimism, so Clerics of the Mother and the Peasant share prayers at the feasts that occur at this time, although it is a popular feast among all religious orders!
Midsummer is an occasion of merriment and feasting that centres on the midpoint of the hottest months of the year. This is the point when the sun is in solstice, and, in many parts of the north, it barely dips below the horizon. It is a festival that celebrates life and the vibrance of mankind’s spirit. In the long twilight, lovers announce
marriages, formal suitors make their proposals, and soaring ballads are recited in offering to Aeladh.
It is the high point in civic cultural calendars, when most playwrights, actors, and bards will present their finest works. The feast-halls of the north come alive with works of art that bring the common folk together, and praise Aeladh in their presentation. Most events will re-enact events told in An B’Aelathil, tended over and led in the revelry by the clerics of the Devoted Order. An older cleric might oversee the libations of the younger folk and ensure it doesn’t get out of hand, whilst younger clerics with fewer responsibilities might well ensure it does.
Founding is a holy day promoted by the guilds and clerics of the Wright. It occurs in late summer, but is only popular in urban areas where both the church and guilds are powerful. During the festival, The Order of the Wright bless the local Guildmasters - or respected craftspeople if there are no local guilds – who in turn induct novices or promote newly-trained members to guildmember status.
Guilds use the festival to show off their best crafts (brewers guilds have their own very popular mini-festival), promote themselves to the nobility, and offer gifts to the commoners and the poor. In many towns the events take place around a procession of guild-members that can rival the royal processions of the Open Field in their grandeur.
The First Hunt occurs in early autumn. It is dedicated to Aeladh by followers of Valour and is accompanied by a tourney in those lands with the lords to lead them.
The Hunt organises all worshippers into tracking parties, and is headed by the local lord if so amenable. Prey is chosen from among the animals of the region – usually stag, boar, deer, game birds for the nobility and chosen freemen, with badgers, otters, and hares for the commoners. This offers the young nobles and aspiring commoners a chance to be noticed by their betters, and by the church.
Aside from the hunt itself, a tourney of footmen and archery gives everyone plenty of chances to impress. The clerics of Valour arrange suitable competitions to help young men and women of the parish show their skills to potential suitors.
Oaths is a day in late autumn that marks the formal end of the year’s hostilities. Although this is fast becoming an outdated ideal as the influence of Baalphegor grows and soldiery becomes a year-round occupation, most soldiers who war against other men would expect to cease the active conflict by the beginning of winter at the latest.
The feast originated as a time when kings would hold the oaths of their men fulfilled, although many guilds, secret societies, and priesthoods (including the Honourable) now use the day to renew their oaths of loyalty. Members of the Honourable Order accompany the feast to ensure oaths are taken in the correct manner and with respect to Aeladh. As with most feasts, considerable amounts of food and drink accompany the oath-taking. Tradition dictates that the wise take their oaths in the morning, and the fools make them in the evening, sometimes to their surprise the next morning.
Whitemoon is an important feast for those who keep the tuition of Vigil close at hand. Both moons, Earendel and Aurendel, are full in the night’s sky, which illuminates the world with a pale cream glow. Clerics of Vigil lead people in praise to Aeladh for the moons which light the night. Both commoner and noble celebrate with night-time hunts or games, followed by parties that last into the morning.
Whitemoon occurs at least twice in a calendar year. The first feast of the year is led by clerics of Vigil, and the second by clerics of the Exile. In some years Whitemoon occurs a third time. Third Whitemoon is an auspicious occasion.
Whitemoon is a sacred occasion for Druids, both Cernubi and Adherent, and the feast of Second Whitemoon, under the watch of clerics of Ferocity, is a time for all Adherent clerics to renew their faith in Aeladh. It is also an ideal time to flush out or destroy sects of Cernubas as they prepare their own abominable feasts.
Harvest Tide is the largest rural festival of the year, and occurs late in the year, often not long after Oaths, when fighting men return home from the field of battle to bring in their crops. Regardless of the prosperity of that years’ crops, some festivities are observed, and a little of a good lord or abbot’s surplus is spent on thanking his serfs.
The Harvest Tide is a cause of great revelry. A prized animal, specially raised for the occasion, is slaughtered, and a blessing is presided over by the highest-ranking cleric of Toil in the community. Custom dictates that one-third of the beast is offered to Aeladh (his clerics), one-third to the lord of the manor, and one-third to the people. As such, the whole manor, including the lord and clerics, assist with selecting, breeding, and raising the fatted animal. Such a creature of usually more substantial and filling than commonfolk could expect to rear on their own. This cements the bond between lord, commoner, and church.
Hierarchy of the Covenant
The origins of the Covenant spring from the ruined Red Abbey at Muhr-i-nRos, a swampy river-valley leading to the Eireadh Ros inlet. It was here that, during the dark centuries of the Ulla Conir dominion, the messenger of Aeladh spoke to The Mother of the faith, and promised salvation in return for the restoration of Aeladh’s name across the world. That salvation was a barbarian lord from the east, who cast out the unholy Ulla and, briefly, restored the lands of the Near North under his banner. At the ancient site of Awen, the leaders of the disparate temples recognised the supremacy of Aeladh. In return for their obeisance, the leaders of churches were granted powerful roles in the new universal church. The hierarchy of the Covenant in 1372CR evolved from these historical positions.
Awensere at the top, down to the Osserim, the Aldserim, the Serim, and the Noviarch and his Noviserim. Alongside this is the Order Militant (The Allegiant Guard), and the Order Secreto, the church spies and assassins.
The Orders Spiritual
The core of the Covenant is its clerics, aspirants, and assistants to the church. These are spread across the land of the north from the mists of the Ulla Coast to the boundaries of the Ilantha forests. Clerics are concentrated into basilicae and colleges in the cities, where as many as a dozen Aldsere administer scores of clerics across various Divine orders in support of
Aeladh’s works. In the cities, powerful Osserim will give advice to the city nobility and are as politically active as they are spiritually. But in the countryside, each manor will have a Sere who advises its landholder, and some even administer manors themselves. Here, the pastoral efforts can involve taking a share of the labour of the common peasantry, although senior clerics often shun such base activites. The Orders Spiritual are divided between the Divine paths, but generally adhere to the structure agreed at the Council of Awen.
The Noviserim (Novices of clerical levels 1-3)
Official Titles include ‘Novitiate, Adept, Aspirant’
The early years of clerical training take place in scriptoria attached to churches, abbeys, or in the urban Collegia of Egel or Wikkensmeade. Typically, a young aspirant is taken into one of the orders at age eleven or twelve, rising through the novice ranks through menial tasks until eventually they are assigned to a cleric as an servant or scribe. From here the lessons of humility and hierarchy are learned through example. The pattern of indentured service varies according to the tasks and rank of their master, but progression is commonly slow, disciplined, and, for most, immensely frustrating. A Novisere can spend much of their adolescence in the service of a cleric, fulfilling their duty of indenture only by adulthood. The cleric who leads a group of Novisere is usually a Sere of almost senior rank, and holds the title Noviarch.
Serim (Clerics of level 3+). Title ‘Blessed Brother/Sister, Your Reverence, or (where landed or of military rank) Blessed Protector.’
The Serim (sing. Sere) is the rank of clerics which form the backbone of the Covenant. These officials, holy warriors, and guardians tend churches and shrines to the Divines all across the north. Each Sere (cleric) is
required to seek inspiration from at least one Divine through whom their devotions pass to Aeladh. In prestigious or urban areas, a cleric might be one of dozens responsible for upkeep of the faith and discipline of the novices below them. But in a rural backwater, a single cleric might be responsible for travel across an area containing many shrines. In the aftermath of war, it is common for one cleric to tend several shrines, or oversee the well-being of a number of temples which may have fallen into disrepair. Necessarily, such a cleric would be required to defend the faith with both sermon and sword. But in general, a cleric who tends a typical village church will oversee novices or farmland belonging to that temple and has a social standing equivalent to the local knight with a manor, although the knight generally takes precedence if both are present. The leader of a church, as well as the clerical rank, also takes the title of Hirsere (pl. Hirserim), but it is rare that a position of leadership would not be filled by an Ald.
Aldserim (Senior Clerics, endowed, but rarely below cleric level 7).
Titles include ‘Blessed Father/Mother, Lord Reverant, or (where landed or with military rank) Blessed Lord’
In circumstances where a cleric is recognised by the Serirmot for inspirational leadership or wisdom in the guidance of other clerics, that cleric may be promoted to Aldsere - often shortened to Ald – a Senior Cleric. With such a promotion comes entry to the Serirmot, the council of clerics, and significant spiritual authority over the knights and lords of the region. This post assumes lordship over clerics of a region equivalent to a fief, but this can vary. For instance, the Sere of Mosten holds lands equivalent to two-hundred manors, whereas the Alsdere of the Baol Isles accounts only ten small manors over a wide area; Mosten certainly holds the greater wealth and military power, but Baol holds much greater ecclesiastic power, being a member of the Serirmot.
The position of Ald is hotly contested between the holy orders eager to increase their influence over the Serirmot, and thus the Covenant.
The Serimot (Gathering of the Seres)
The Serimot is an ancient gathering of clerics, senior, and grand clerics, called once every year, for the agreement of articles of faith, settle disputes, discuss high-profile appointments or excommunications, and formally agree a position of holy war. In the latter case, the Awensere may call a Serimot at any time, and is, in practice, merely the formality of agreement. Whilst most Aldserim bring attendant clerics and promising Noviserim, only the Ald are permitted to sit, discuss, and pledge to vote. The Serimot meets in the Basilica nRos at Muhr-i-nRos, but more recently has also met in the Grand Palace at Egel due to conflicts in the region of the Red Abbey.
Osserim (Grand Clerics, bestowed after attaining eligibility at cleric levels 10-11).
Titles include ‘Allegiant Lord, Your Excellency.’
Ossere is the most senior position a cleric can attain in any one order of the faith. An Ossere is responsible for the discipline and well-being of the Aldserim below them, and of protecting the faith at a strategic level in an area equivalent to a ducal domain. Such is the strategic importance of the Osserim that they oversee a retinue of Allegiant Guard, and often a significant military levy, usually with the lands equivalent to an Earl, and is often the most powerful spiritual advisor in a given region. In times of stability there are usually 20-30 Ossere in the north, spread from the Ulla Coast to the borders of the Ilantha. Their temporal political allegiances depend on which kingdom they belong, but their spiritual allegiance is to the Awensere. Notably, as the Awensere is the spiritual advisor to the Allegiant Throne at Egel, the treatment of an Ossere by such kings can curry favour with the powerful kingdom of Egel, and can be a source of revenue which flows from the Awensere to such a liege.
Awensere (Patriarch, Elected. No Awensere has been elected when below clerical level 18)
Title ‘Apostolic, Your Holiness’
The Awensere is the spiritual head of the Covenant, He or she takes the official titles of Commander of the Allegiant Guard, Confessor to Kings, Guardian of the Red Abbey, and Supreme Servant of Aeladh. The Awensere is a position bestowed by the Serimot upon their chosen Ossere. They are the figurehead of the Covenant, and, although consultation with the Ossere is commonplace, they have executive control of all matters of the church. This includes promotion of spiritual practice, spending of tithes, and the proclamation of anathema or denunciation of foreign powers for spiritual reasons. The Awensere is commander of an elite and formidably-equipped military force, the Allegiant Guard, who form the core of the defences of the Muhr-i-nRos valley as well as church estates. The Allegiant Guard are also the most loyal defenders of the King of Egel, the Hartlord. Although the Allegiant
are protectors of kings and heirs across the north, their protection is earned through favour to the Awensere, who holds ultimate authority over each of them. The current Awensere is Her Holiness Magrethe, Second of Her Name.
The Orders Militant
The spiritual authority exercised by the Covenant extends directly from the miraculous events at Muhr-i-nRos, where Aeladh reaffirmed his love for mankind. Spiritual and moral discipline is maintained by clerics and their superiors as described, but enforcement of covenant power and discipline is carried out by the Orders Militant. These are the fighting soldiers of the covenant; those who take up arms to defend their faith and their lands, and who give temporal substance to the spiritual tuition of the Divines.
Each divine order, be it Honourable, Merciful, or otherwise, maintains a force under arms to defend the chapels and villages over whom the Covenant offers protection. Many regions limit the size of such orders to preserve the power of their local lords and knights, and in practice the militant orders are almost always soldiers or paladins who wish to serve Aeladh but have not the wisdom to spread his word or administer his flock; few have political ambition. Regardless, each order has its own hierarchy. Brothers and sisters rise through ranks similar to those of a feudal retinue.
New inductees are known as ‘Squires’, although unlike their feudal counterparts they are not necessarily recruited at a young age. As squires, they learn the discipline required to accompany the clerics and their place as guardians or envoys of the church. Progression from raw recruit to the senior squire (often dubbed ‘first squire’ as a title of precedence not authority) is as much a product of loyalty as skill at arms.
Squires who complete their training are dubbed by their cleric as ‘Companions’. This is the rank and file of the orders, although considerably better trained than the rank and file of most armies of the day, who are expected to carry out the orders of their clerical superiors without question. A cleric of the Covenant who operates in foreign, or especially hostile lands on church business can expect a retinue of companions, led by a sergeant who is senior to their fellows but under order from the cleric. A typical chapel in a rural parish will not have the resources to feed and equip more than three or four companions for full-time service, but even the lowliest chapel or shrine can call upon at least a part-time guardian, perhaps served by a squire or two.
In larger settlements, or if an assignment requires a larger military force, this is arranged under a ‘Knight Companion’, who oversees several sergeants, each with their companions to command. The knight companion is often a paladin or devoted warrior, having received knightly authority equivalent to a cleric directly from an Aldsere. Knight companions are still military servants of the church, and are often happy to obey even cloistered sisters or brothers. Authority over them is exercised by an Aldsere, however they also remain under the command of local clerics who hold lands or military rank themselves. Knight companions are distinguished by their tabards, similar to those worn by their feudal equivalents, emblazoned not with feudal heraldry but that of their order and their rank in that order. Those knight companions assigned to defend the larger
temples of the Covenant are addressed as templars, and wear distinctive red tabards.
Larger churches, such as those of large towns or where a Ossere is present, maintain a large number of both divine and militant orders. The military here is often commanded by soldiers of the rank of ‘Knight Commanders’, usually paladins of high rank, high morale, and shrewd tactical and military ability. Despite their lofty military position, they remain military servants and advisors to the clerics of the church, although only an Aldsere or higher rank has absolute authority over them.
The Allegiant Guard Each divine order is permitted to maintain a force for the defence of clerics, the laity, and the Covenant lands they oversee. Whilst this force is small, deliberately so as to pose little threat to the feudal lands they occupy, it is highly-trained and fanatically loyal. Separate from this is a smaller group of knights which are drawn from the most loyal and dangerous of the militant orders. The Allegiant Guard is an elite chivalric order that operates under the direct command of the higher ranks of the Covenant. Its primary purpose is to protect the lives of the higher ranks of the Covenant, but also to protect those loyal to the covenant, or from whom it derives its power. In practical terms, this means the Allegiant guard protect the kings, queens, and their heirs, in lands which profess allegiance to Aeladh and the Covenant. The guard is used as a personal errant force for the Awensere; each knight is trained in heraldic language and serves as a military envoy for the Awensere and therefore the Covenant as a whole.
Entry to the Allegiant Guard is through recommendation by the cleric under whom the knight serves in their respective military order. The standing of
that order is important in selecting the knight; the favour of the Awensere or Marshall of the Temple depends on which Divine order they represented during their early clerical life. Commonly, the knight companion or commander is selected in secret and then expected to perform a quest or errand for the church in which their personal loyalty, ability, and behaviour is tested. Those who succeed are invited to meet their Ossere, and at this meeting they renounce their affiliation to the military order and declare allegiance to the Awensere of the day.
Each soldier of the Allegiant Guard holds rank of at least knight companion in their respective order, but renounces formal ties to that order upon induction into the Allegiant. Their sole loyalty is to the Awensere, who, in turn, grants authority to the royal family or Ossere they protect.
Knights of the Allegiant are typically armed with a polearm which carries their personal heraldry, as well as a sword dedicated with both their personal coat of arms and the symbol of Aeladh, the Ardent Flame. Their armour is the finest lobstered plate steel available, adorned with a tabard of white upon which the arms of the Awensere are present, and finished with a cloak trimmed with white winter furs. The symbol of office for those Allegiant tasked with guarding royalty or clerical persons is the shield. This is carried at all times, and is designed to interlink with the shields of other Allegiant to form a barrier around the person.
The Allegiant guard is a force of unknown size. However, its greatest concentration is at Egel and Muhr-i-nRos, where chapters of some six-hundred knights guard Covenant buildings, the Awensere, and King Aeden of the Hart. These are administered by ‘Knights Marshall’, with overall administration below the Awensere carried out by the Marshall of the Temple
who resides in the Basilica of Muhr-i-nRos. At this size, it is likely that many knights are on assignment in foreign lands, but the concentration of dangerous knights with a fanatical loyalty to Aeladh, the Awensere, and the crown, is often enough to make prospective attackers think again.
Despite their fierce loyalty and iron discipline, knights of the Guard are still only human (and non-humans are incredibly rare), and vices can make their way into chapterhouses during times of peace or lax discipline. Knights of the Guard are aware of their powerful position which makes it easy for a knight to abuse that power, ostensibly in the name of the crown or the church. In such instances, they fall at risk of censure by their commanders, clerics, or marshall. But investigation of offences is the duty of the Keepers of the Word.
The Orders Secreto
The Keepers of the Word Whilst the soldiers protect and the clerics preach, the spies, diplomats, and inquisitors of the Covenant attend to duties that the Awensere would rather keep hidden. These are performed by the Keepers of the Word, often abbreviated to simply ‘the Keepers’, a chapter of clerics, monks, heralds, and, if required, assassins, who owe their personal loyalty to the Awensere. The organisation is based at the Basilica of Muhr-i-nRos. Its ostensible purpose is to maintain the purity of the word of Aeladh in the face of internal and external threats to the Covenant, and most laity will have no idea whether they have ever met any of its members.
Membership of the Keepers is by invitation through recommendation, and often only at the end of a long
period during which the candidate is investigated by the order. Candidates will often be expected to discern that the order is interested in their skills without the order explicitly stating so, such as by recognising patterns of symbols on a found garment, or the nuances of a stranger’s handshake. In this way, the Keepers can deny an invitation was issued; the price to pay for refusing an acknowledged invitation is often fatal.
Duties of the Keepers are broad, as is their degree of authority and responsibility. They investigate internal threats to the church such as corruption and abuse of power among the three branches, reporting directly to the Awensere where they cannot solve the matter themselves. Dedicated members of the order investigate and solve threats to the church from external sources. This includes threats to the power of the church by rival kings or lords, or from clerics of other faiths. Of particular importance in the early days of the Covenant was the threat of druidic faiths who would not renounce their pagan ways, but this is less of a danger nowadays. Of greater current threat is the ongoing presence of Kainan agents and the infiltration of society by Baalphegorite clerics.
Together with defending the faith, some agents of the order are tasked with discovering ways to increase the strength of the church in foreign lands. They accompany official missions by clerical envoys to infiltrate royal courts or tribal councils long after the envoys have departed, usually with varying degrees of success. Of particular frustration is their complete failure to infiltrate the Ilantha woods. Like many before them, the clerics of the Covenant are envious of the power of the elves; they believe that mankind is ready to learn from their immortal kindred once more, heeding the lessons of the past to understand the teaching of Aeladh’s Divines from their most ancient children. ⛭
T
he origins of the largest church in Forodain are clouded by myths and imperiled by conflict. It is a miracle that we know so much, so spare a moment and pray for the martyrs who carried Aeladh's word in the dark times. This word is clarified and
recorded in fact in the scared text An B’Aelathil. This summary honours Blessed Brede by adhering to his written accounts, including accurate reproductions of the miracles at Muhr-in-nRos; the spoken word of God himself.
The Mythic Era
The Covenant teaches that in the beginning was Aeladh alone, from whom all thought and deed passed, who was and is without beginning or end. Aeladh gave thought and life to the void. This is the Itherium, the mutable, immortal realm, which is shaped by emotion and thought. Aeladh willed beings into existence to dwell in this place. These are the Divines. He gave them limitless ability to create and reshape the void, and it sprang into many forms according to their wills. They altered their realm with neither effort nor care until it had twisted into nought but chaos. Aeladh saw them quarrel over which creation should have precedence, and they beseeched him to intervene and choose a favourite. He answered them by creating another place, alongside the void, but different in nature.
This was the immutable world – the mortal realm. From an Ardent Flame of his own light he imbued the realm with life and watched it sprout with forests, burst with mountains, and flow rivers into valleys and oceans.
Of the Divines and the Elves
Aeladh now took from each Divine a strand of life to weave a new form. The eldest of races, they were the Elves.
Aeladh’s Divine children clustered around the Elves. The Divines’ instinct was to protect them from the harsh world in which they dwelt. But Aeladh cautioned them, for many were eager to impart their knowledge, and craft for the Elves a likeness and greatness as themselves. He said unto them:
“You are not gods, so be not worshipped by these infants. Instead you are my children, and I will teach you as you teach your own
offspring, these mortal Elves.”
So the Divines reluctantly hid, and spoke only to the Elves through the breath of winds, the roar of the sea, the rumble of the earth, or the visions in the flames. From afar and in secret they taught the Elves to shape their world enough to survive the ages and communicate with each other. The Elves learned of the elements and, before long, came to control their world through farming, mining, and the husbandry of livestock.
Chapter Three: History of the Faith
But they knew a power was at work and they responded by erecting shrines to the unseen forces that guided them. Across the ages, these shrines grew into temples, and when the Divines grew proud of their success, they slipped into hubris. Passing from the immortal realm to the mortal world, they brought with them creation and entropy and a connection to the Itherium. Magic entered the world, and infused its land and creatures here and there. Other sentient beings came forth, such as the Dwarrow and Halflings, whom the Elves themselves met and taught.
The Elves were unmatched in their inquisitive nature. They learned of magic swiftly, until they could match the Divine’s skill in shaping and influencing their mortal world. They constructed great colleges to concentrate their knowledge. The seers’ ability grew, and to symbolise this they adopted as their symbol the great Ardent Flame, a gift from Aeladh, placed at the centre of their temple at Awen. There the Elves learned how to see the forms of the Divines, and beyond them, the Itherium itself. This caused a dissonance. The Divines were revealed as creatures, not gods. Some understood their folly in teaching the Elves such power, fearful they would outgrow the immortals. But other, darker Divines saw their designs almost come to fruition; finally, by corrupting the Elves, they had power over the mortal realm.
The skill of the Elves attracted other beings. Creatures of the Itherium strayed into the mortal world as Elves channelled its power. Some were ferocious and a fear spread among the mortals that they might be destroyed. Elves grew envious of the Divines’ immortality. They conspired to evade the dark creatures that crept into the world by crossing over into the immortal world alongside their Divine teachers. Not for the first time, mortals aspired to walk among their gods. Scholars knew this as the Convergence.
To cross into the Itherium, the Elves created a gate. And through the gate into which they stepped came a flow of magic, which the Elves had not the power to stop. They cast wards about their great forests to prevent the spread of magic that might endanger the world beyond. Within this girdle coursed the power of
the Itherium, so that the elves were immortal at last.
And the Divines were overjoyed to
have, at last, their offspring dwell alongside them.
The Elves are Sundered
But not all Elves enjoyed this victory
over death. As the wards were cast about the woodland
realm, they cut off those that lived in the greater world outside. Elves
continued to grow old and die beyond the girdle.
The leaders of the Elven families met to dispute with
those lords who breached the Itherium and cut them off from
those outside. In their hubris, the Elven lords posed their kin the ultimatum - to stay and live an immortal life, or go beyond the girdle and grow old. Once beyond the wards, their immortality would cease, and they were forbidden return to the woodland realm. Their kin of future generations would be known as Vallasaari - the Exiles - who would never know the splendour of Ilantha or it immortality.
The families parlayed and most agreed to remain, out of loyalty to their kin. But a few condemned the Elven lords, deeming they had turned their backs to Aeladh. They exulted that death in the favour of Aeladh was better than life in his absence. This drew the ire of the lords, and a conflict erupted. Many were slain, on both sides, forcing the Vallasaari to flee without their wealth. This kinslaying, the result of the intrgues of the Divines, infused the Itherium with mortal blood. This was sweet succour to the creatures there, tainting them to lust for it evermore. This is known as the First Sin.
But wroth was Aeladh, who watched as his Divines and Elven lords conspired to allowed the living world to become infused with the immortal Itherium. And he said to them;
“You have undone my work. You have tainted both worlds with the other. But
what you have done, you have done through a desire to live among each other;
for love of the other.” “And so you shall have the prize and
suffering of the immortals. But you shall not dwell in the Heavens, for that is not a
place of the living.” So Aeladh pulled the two worlds apart, and stopped
the flow of one to the other. Magic was diminished in the mortal realm, and Elves remained immortal within their verdant kingdoms.
But the Convergence made its mark upon the Itherium too. The spirits came into contact with the living and tasted mortal, impressionable, eager life. When the two realms were pulled apart, they lusted for its taste once more, and pressed against the bounds of their world to feel it again.
The Divines who taught the Elves of the Covergence banded together against Aeladh, angry at his rebuke and intervention. So he addressed them aloud, so that all the creatures of the world could understand;
“Ye are spirits of discontent, a discordant choral voice in the heavens. Ye sing in
harmony, but against my works” “You shall be known by your nature, and
work in secret no more.” “All shall call thee Baalphegor, the corruptor.” “Yet you are of my being, and you are true
to your nature. I will not vanquish thee; just as you work against my will, all that worship me shall work against yours.”
And such it was that Baalphegor coalesced to a single form, lusting for the mortal world, and for the perversion of Aeladh’s works.
Mankind - the people of Aeladh's flame
Aeladh witnessed the failure of his creations. The Ilantha Elves fenced themselves against the mortal realm. Only a few Vallasaari remained to guard the world against the temptation and terror of the Itherium. So Aeladh considered his living world and saw the lesser races – the Dwarves, the Halflings, the Gnomes – against races spat out from the Itherium which infested darkness – the Goblins, the Trolls, and the Hags. But one race of people, apart from the others, was not formed of the Itherium, nor of Divine hand. They evolved unbidden from the sheltered forests of the world itself. Across the ages, they had grown from the seas and spread to the land to inhabit protected regions, lush with life, from where they crafted rudimentary shelters. Ignored by the Divines, they evolved from Aeladh’s earth itself. This was mankind.
And Aeladh said to these mute and mindless Humans;
“Of all things, only you are from that which I wrought with my own hand. Only you are of and from this earth, and you know not Aeladh nor my children in the heavens.”
“Innocent you are, and I curse you not with
the burdens of your forebears’. Rather I shall set my own spirit of wisdom within
you, so that only through faith in me shall you grow, and trust not the voices of
discord or ambition from the heavens. And in your mouths shall I place my word, so
that you may speak my name to each other. And when my name echoes in all corners of the world, so shall I return to you, and
among all the life of the earth I shall bring you to walk in the heavens beside me.”
And to the Divines he said;
“You are mighty in the heavens, my children, but you shall have no power on earth but
through these mortals. Set your fire in them as I have, and let your wisdom kindle
through the ages. These mortal men’s bodies came unbidden from the earth of
my hand, and to the earth they shall return.”
“In their hearts I have set my fire, an unquenchable power that can never be
satisfied, and they shall be consumed by it. This fire is of the heavens, and to heaven it
shall return.” “In their mouths I have placed my word. They shall know me, and they shall exalt
my name. They shall know ye also, through your interventions in my name, but shall
worship no gods but I alone.”
The Rise of Man
Mankind spread swiftly from their tribal homes in the southern continent, Calenor. Over centuries they stumbled across the abandoned relics of pre-Convergence Elves, and counted among their greatest dangers the aggressive spirits of the Itherium that hid there still. The encounters with powerful entities of the heavens drew many tribes to worship them as deities, as demanded. The cults formed by these tribes intermingled, coming to hold each others’ chosen ‘deity’ as either a rival or an equal to their own. In such a way
grew primitive pantheons, and a caste of tribal shamans whose role it was to direct peoples in their worship.
Over time, and in reaction to their encounters with the advanced cultures of Elves and the efficient organisation of the Dwarves, human culture swiftly evolved to a settled pattern. Nomadic tribes gave way to fledgling monarchies, and the regular inter-tribal skirmishes became less frequent, but bloodier, as weaponry and tactics advanced in response to the academia fostered by a more settled way of life. The so-called gods of mankind, whose origins were long-forgotten, also reshaped themselves in response; gods of agriculture, learning, trade, and artifice, joined the well-established gods of the elements, the suns, the forest, and warfare.
The powers which fed off worship of mortals became stronger in the heavens, and could respond to the rituals of those who understood how to manipulate the Itherium. Clerics, of a kind, gained boons from their immortal masters. Alongside them, alleviated from the pressure of warfare, an academic caste discovered, from meticulous study and deciphering elven artifacts, ways to manipulate the Itherium after their own fashion.
Even in primitive monarchies such as men would form to govern themselves, the question of who
governed the unseen was a source of wonder. The ancient gods from the eldest days of mankind came to take on a central role in their spiritual life, far removed from their original roles as patrons of animistic cults. The gods interacted with each other now, although none ever really claimed to have created the elements they governed. As Br. Ansell of Westchauce reminds us in ‘Reflections of the Divine’, even these ‘gods’ knew their place in the spiritual hierarchy; they guided their flock, but made no claims to creation. However as proud arch-spirits, they were careful to cultivate awe in their ambiguity, so neither did they deny creation of the world or the heavens.
As the dominion of elves receded due to the limits of their much-coveted immortal realms, so the tide of mankind swept across the world. From the sands of the utter south rose a powerful Empire that venerated a sacred light; an Ardent Flame that was a symbol of their pantheon, and tended by their Emperor who was proclaimed a descendant of the immortals. As this Empire spread, it pushed outcasts and rebels to its fringes, from the warm south into the temperate north. Into the valleys of Calenor and across the Crimson Sea to Forodan they came, settling alongside the other, more established peoples, mingling, and deriving much of their culture.
The flame of Vindammar
In Calenor, a settlement grew at a fertile river-crossing, sheltered from the armies of the southern god-king by a ring of dangerous mountains. Over time, this god-king rejected the pantheon of gods and proclaimed himself the sole deity of his realm. And so the clerics of the Flame fled north and west. Across the ring of mountains they came. They took with them the Ardent Flame of their own faith, and came to the river crossing and placed it and their gods at the centre of the emerging civilisation in the midst of the Vale of Vindammar.
Within decades of shelter the settlement grew, the Flame of Vindammar became a beacon, and its culture expanded to attract other settlements which declared allegiance. The settlement outgrew the river, then the valley, and soon the encircling mountains themselves.
The Vindammari worshipped their gods as a family, in much the same fashion as they did before the deification of their king in the south. Their wide pantheon even reserved a place for an aspect of Accursed Baalphegor, which recognised his role as an outcast, something to be feared; a bogeyman to scare children. But some came to worship him as something else; a foreboding figure for those who could go nowhere else, to whisper dark curses, a cult where they might be answered. As their Empire spanned across the southern continent, wealth flowed to the capital. And wealth bred excess. The struggle to survive had succeeded, and without foreign rivals the objective of power became simply to preserve those excesses. Corruption gnawed at the pillars of this empire, and the rulers failed the ruled. Those second-sons who would never know power festered in their anger and impotence as the elites presided over imperial decline. The temples, whose altars glimmered with the riches of the aristocracy, offered no answers. Only the dark recesses of the pantheon, worshipped by outcasts, offered the opportunity to make Vindammar grand again. Blinded by their ambition and fear, they listened to the honeyed words of this malevolence; they overthrew the corrupt senate; they spilled the blood of their own emperor for the favour of their patron, who promised to end all their ills with a simple sacrifice. This is recognised as The Second Sin.
It is said by heretics, in their ignorance, that Aeladh failed us all by allowing Baalphegor to destroy the Empire of Vindammar. When his demonic form was summoned, and the city Vindammar itself annihilated, the sacrifice opened a gate between Baalphegor’s realm in the Itherium and the mortal world, through which his power flowed. Aeladh acted through his mortal vassals to close that rift and prevent the destruction of the world, trapping Accursed Baalphegor on the mortal realm. Rather than betray mankind, Aeladh cast one of the Divines from the heavens to earth. And whilst powerful, Aeladh made Baalphegor mortal. And so, as the Vindammari Empire collapsed, and shadow covered the east, we live with the possibility that Baalphegor can be destroyed. It is faith in Aeladh that guides us to that end.
The divergent pantheon
As the Itherium cascaded through the rift at Vindammar, it corrupted everything. Rivers became infested, nameless things grew at the heart of lakes, and trees twisted with hate. The petty, bitter orcs and goblins which festered beneath the world now stepped out of the shadows, and became footsoldiers for Baalphegor’s
tyranny. They drove all before them, spreading fear and bloodshed.
In the midst of this terror, a few faithful souls of the church hid the Ardent Flame, keeping it kindled only in glowing embers. Their gods could not protect them from this storm of evil, but they did not abandon all hope. They gathered up the ashes and hid them in a reliquary. But disaster befell the clerics. In their flight north, across the Crimson Sea, the ashes of the Ardent Flame were lost. Perhaps hidden, perhaps destroyed, the ashes’ disappearance plunged the faithful into a deep crisis. The symbol of their gods was lost along with their homes and their way of life. When the refugees found new homes, their temples diverged from Vindammari doctrine and became more like the disparate faiths of their new lands. The result was inevitable. The cohesive pantheon split apart and, like each temple which tried to draw followers, the gods came to compete with one another, like those of the lands the new temples inhabited.
In Forodain, what was once known as the Vindammari pantheon was spread outward, by missionaries trade, from the cities that would become Benin Othma and Pridea. The existing cleric caste of these lands began amalgamating Vindammari doctrines with those of their own. Some Dwarrow and Halfolk saw reflections of their own gods in this human pantheon.
Human settlements of this time were ruled by princelings who traded with Dwarves and explored the abandoned temples, cities, and burial grounds, bringing them power. But it also brought them conflict with the remaining elven families, who were fored to flee into seclusion. As time went on, and the lowlands were cleared of petty orc and goblin vermin, the conflict with Elves receded. The Elves had long left the cities outwith the forests of Ilantha, but the power of Dwarves was also on the wane since the destruction of their capital and loss of their king. In time, the lands left fallow by both Elf and Dwarf were settled by mankind.
Rival claimants pledged allegiance to their gods to augment their military and political strength. They harnessed one god or another to sway their own people and those they meant to conquer. Religious allegiance brought danger to the church. The appearance of foreign gods accompanied by wealthy clerics who might preach against them, drew hostility from warlords who responded to the threat with war. The Vindammari pantheon, even where it was assumed into the fabric of northern tribes, attracted violent reaction. The Rossan King Vitar II, fresh from uniting the disparate island peoples of the Othmael Archipelago, drove the worshippers of Vindammari gods from the coast and into the dangerous uplands of Heath. Those who pledged their wealth to him, and accepted the tenets of the Othmar Liturgies over their gods survived. Many chose to hide their old faiths behind new rites for the survival of their order. In this way, the names of those Vindammari gods survived in part, and centuries later, their missionaries went back across the sea and returned Calenor to the Pantheon.
But some clerics would not renounce their ways, and were harried by Vitar's army into the wilds. The dark, foggy inlets of the Eireadh Ros were impassable and
full of dark omens. But a group of clerics, led by a man named Brede, fled here and found safety. And it was here, in ancient ruins of the Muhr-in-nRos marshlands, that Brede was summoned by a long-forgotten creature to a place of reverent silence. It was here that the miracle of Muhr-in-nRos began, mortal man finally heard the word of God. This was later recorded by Blessed Brede in a book known as An B’Aelathil.
An B'Aelathil - the word of God
The B’Aelathil accounts for little of how the cleric Brede came to this place at the Muhr-in-nRos, ‘Red Marsh’, or exactly what the creature looked like. A bright light blinded others who accompanied the priest, after seeing a vision of ‘angelic form’. Brede dwells not on the form of the speaker, but focuses much of An B’Aelathil to recording the creation of the world and cosmos as laid out by the long-forgotten voice of Aeladh. Aeladh’s message, at this time, was of hope.
Aeladh said to him:
“Long have you fled, keepers of my flame, and long will you flee yet. But know all
that this place I have made safe for you; a refuge against the false gods. All of these
lands are yours in my name. “In my word you shall know the ordering of the world and the heavens; for too long have my divine children taken my place in temples and silent offerings. Rekindle my
flame in your hearts.”
The clerics consecrated a temple at the ruins. They sacrificed a calf; one of a pair with which they fled. As dawn broke, the mists lifted, and Vitar’s men drew near. They came upon the temple, and saw the blood upon an altar. Fear of the ghosts of the Muhr-in-nRos caused Vitar’s retinue to flee. And when they recovered their courage at the mouth of the valley, Vitar was gone,
and never seen again. Folk tales speak of the spirits of the Red Marsh taking him, but An B’Aelathil is clear; Aeladh spoke to him, and he repented his ways, joined the brother monks, and taught them what he knew to protect their new refuge and organise their people.
The clerics prepared for the coming of another, a saviour, who would deliver Aeladh's people from evil. And as they prepared, across the decades of Blessed Brede’s long life, the messenger reappeared and spoke with him, telling him of the Divines, the Elves, of life and death, heaven and earth, and the evils of Baalphegor. It told him of a time of great evil, of hooded riders, and of the Mother, the Prophet, and of the King in the East.
For centuries the monks waited. Their little temple and monastery was replenished through devotions of nearby villagers. But beyond the vale of the Muhr-in-nRos, the people kept to the worship of their own gods. And the kings of men across the north and south forgot the fleeing clerics, and the name of the creator.
The Trial of the North
The coming of the Ulla Conir
The disparate churches of mankind vied for the attention of their rulers, so that men became divided by both faith and politics. It was the intervention of powerful kings of the Amundmen, settlers from the northern uplands of the regions we now call the Hart, that united men under the belief that the divines could be worshipped as a pantheon. These beliefs largely accorded with the Letters of Blessed Iula, Lord Cleric of Egel, under whose cautious guidance the King of the Egel kept a stable succession, against the machinations of rival churches, for several centuries. The north, and through trade, also the south, entered a period of relative liturgical peace. The peace was soon ended.
In the spring of 660, the mists that surrounded the shrouded isles of Conir lifted, and the ships of Ullan King Braedan II landed at Vondishuii and demanded its surrender. The emissaries of Braedan informed the Jarl that he was claiming his right of entry to the town as the proper claimant to the throne of the Egel.
No-one yet knows why the Ulla Conir cross the sea at this time. The Ulla were a warlike people, prone to the worship of foul creatures birthed during the First Sin, and human sacrifice to appease them. Their raids mostly carried off captives for slavery or sacrifice, and they despoiled temples and shrines of villages they burned. The Ulla seemed dismissively ignorant of other faiths and those who kept them. But that was to change.
Despite Braedan’s outlandish claims, the Jarl ignored the demand and set about the defence of his town. He was said to be wise and well-prepared, but when the Ullan King drew up his troops before the city walls, the Jarl realised this was no audacious raid. It seemed to him that the lands of Conir had emptied of fighting men, and dark creatures walked among them, driving them into a frenzy. Accounts of the brief siege and assault of the walls were threadbare and conflicting, and many were discounted as products of a fevered imagination. But the city fell and there was a great slaughter in the streets. Rather than putting it to the torch, as customary for the Ulla, the King left one of his ruthless nephews in charge.
King Eoric Whitehand of Egel was was counselled to action by his high cleric. But the Ullan army had swiftly moved into the interior. The temples enlisted the help of the dwarves, their ever-stalwart allies, in opposing the Ulla. They would suffer for their loyalty.
Braedan’s army moved quickly across the northern kingdom. He was able to traverse the dangerous Witchwood with ease, amidst rumours of pacts with Hobgoblins and Trolls within. Travelling south towards the Tor, Braedan sent his brother and sworn Tanist Connobar to secure the far north of the realm.
The Ulla Conir tortured, sacrificed, and burned wherever they went. Clerics of the Vindammari pantheon were singled out for special attention by Braedan and Connobar. It was as if they sought to eradicate the gods of men as well as their nobility.
By 662, the towns of the northern Hart and the coastal west were taken by the barbarian. In Spring of 663 King Eoric of Egel met Braedan at Fadh-an-dar, the Field of Ease. Eoric’s horsemen were renowned in battle, and his silver-helmed spearmen held in high
regard for their discipline. But a darkness swept the battlefield on the days before the battle, and great illness befell the common footsoldiers. The King himself was stricken with illness, but led his army in the field. Despite the heroic efforts of his men, the Hartmen fell before the Ulla, and the King, along with his sons, killed or captured in the aftermath.
Braedan II was installed as King of Egel shortly thereafter. The Dwarves and the Men of Amund, who protected the temples of the realm, earned his wrath, and he showed his contempt for the ancients by destroying the Silver Tower of Egel, a remnant of an ancient Elven temple from before the Convergence. The remaining temples across the land evacuated their treasures before he could loot them too.
Connobar Comes to Heath
In 665, Connobar had subdued the northern tribes and now swept down through the Pass of Uren to Babharkka, capturing the town and slaughtering the entire Dwarven population. A decree from the steps of the guildhall demanded that all property and offices held by Dwarves in the land were stripped from them and placed in the hands of the chieftains. Dwarves could no longer hold property either above of below the earth, and no dwarf was permitted a blade. The Dwarrow receded from open battle, and withdrew to their subterranean holds.
Connobar prosecuted his campaign in the north against both Amundmen and Dwarves with brutal efficiency. The capitulation of Babharkka, and the destruction of its Dwarven Guilds, ended coherent overland Dwarven society west of the Eireadh Ros for over four-hundred years, and Amund nobles were forced back to their ancient lands, or into the Vanna.
The Ullan Tanist oversaw the eradication of rural worship of local deities from which communities drew for support. The clerics of Djan Rai became focal points for resistance against the invaders, leading to their persecution. Furtive spies were recruited from among the vulnerable or easily-coerced, currying favour or grasping survival by informing on secretive meetings between the faithful. And so it was that the power of the Ulla Conir lords was extended, through rumour and innuendo, so that distrust and fear defeated what sword and spear could not.
King Braedan was ruthless in both warfare and administration. He extracted debilitating tribute from the surviving manors and towns alike, demanding food for his troops and recruiting local men into his army.
Those who joined the Ullan host told stories of dark rituals led by hunched and hooded figures; tales of half-human creatures that conjured mist to cloak their passing. As the lineage of the Whitehand diminished, the people of the land began to lose hope. Connobar took the veterans of one campaign and began another.
Connobar marched through the Gap of Bor with thirty-thousand Ullan soldiers, augmented by more from their homeland, and captured or set aflame every coastal town and village between Sengil and Hullwater. Raiders struck the Othmael Islands, prompting an emissary from Benin pledged tribute to the Ullan King in return for safety. In this way, both Garrig Alu and Ferringham capitulated, leaving Wikkensmeade isolated whilst many fled north to Sedeberg or south to the Sengi citadel. The Winter of 671 saw an outbreak of plague at Sengil, under which thousands of refugees perished. During the plague, the senior clerics of the Vindammari pantheon escaped east across the Eireadh Ros and south over the Crimson Sea, taking their relics and treasure with them. There was outcry from the common folk at the clerics' cowardice, and riots spread across the city among the common folk left behind. Godless Connobar watched their ships evade his blockade but knew that victory was near; the Heathmen were turning on each other, and after a short seige, Sengil fell to the invaders.
Braedan at Muhr-in-nRos
From Tor Egel, King Braedan took to the field alongside Connobar at the Battle of The Towers outside Sedeberg in Summer of 672. The Bergers emptied their coffers to employ the mightiest army since the Battle of Pierin Dell in days of yore. But the city was betrayed and its blockade of the Eireadh Ros sabotaged, allowing the Ullan fleet to reinforce the host as the battle wore on. The treasury of Sedeberg was plundered, city put to the torch, and many of its citizens taken as slaves for the Ullan nobility. The Battle of The Towers marked the formal surrender of lands west of the channel.
The Ullan overlord recognised the difficulty of taking his army over the Eireadh Ros; the Carcaddi employed strong defences to repel ships from the narrow sea. He resolved to return once he consolidated hold over his dominions.
As the army passed the hills around the Muhr-in-nRos, Braedan learned the rumours and superstitions associated with this place. He heard of a monk who heard the voice of God and a prophesy of a Light in the East. He ordered spies to locate the valley, to satisfy his
curiosity and allay the gnawing fear of this rumour. But they were led astray by the mists, and the entrance to the vale remained hidden. The king’s dark counsellors, those hunched figures of lore, refused to be waylaid so easily and left spies to interrogate locals and find the valley. But their faith and will was strong; Muhr-in-nRos remained hidden by both land and sea.
In 690, King Braedan II perished and was succeeded by his son Connobar. Although he led his father's armies across the continent during the conquest, the new king did not enjoy living on Forodain. He returned to Conir as a hero in 692 with uncountable spoils, and left the continental government in the hands of his most trusted generals. These were two brothers of horrifying lineage - spawned by an Ull’Meargha, a one-eyed swamp-dweller said to possess animal senses - and they shared the hunch-backed gait of her kind. She was a creature of the First Sin, and birthed the brothers during the Second Sin.
The Reign of the Meargha
The two rulers came to be known as the ‘Meargha' and were despised by peasantry and nobility alike. Although Connobar and his men ruled ruthlessly, they were lenient if obeyed. The Meargha brothers revelled in needless cruelty. They cared little for the common people or matters of statecraft; they employed mercenaries to collect artifacts of the ancient elves, extorting high tributes from their nobles to fund the expeditions, and destroyed settlements where the artifacts were found. Rumours swirled that they used the artifacts to prolong their lives, since they came to rule the continent for the entire period up to Men-i-Rauth’s invasion in 840CR. Their dominion had no time to worry about high magic at work in the halls of Egel; they suffered a more pervasive intrusion under the brothers.
The leeway granted by the brothers to lords who pleased them - that is, kept them supplied with troops, gold, and ancient objects - led to cruel abuses of the peasantry. From simple theft of land, livestock, and crops under the guise of tribute, to the violation of their families, some lords acted with malice over their peasantry. If a nobleman did not please the brothers, their hooded and hunch-backed emissaries visited. Those dark riders, who spoke with a gutteral tongue and shared similar lineage as their overlords, invoked the greatest fear among the smallfolk. They enacted their basest impulses with unfettered impunity against mankind, noble, peasant, and child alike, and thought nothing of destroying villages that displeased them.
These were dark times for the common folk. But around campfires and in trusted hearths they swapped stories. Around forbidden icons of their Vindammari gods, wanderers told of a monk who carried a Light from the East, a saviour from their oppression, who would trust in the smallfolk to carry them to victory.
The Mother and the Prophet
In 790CR, the Mother was born in the valley of the Red Marsh. She was like most women, became sworn to a husband from an early age, and lived life under the rule of the family patriarch until her marriage. However, although the detail is not recorded in the B’Aelathil, she fell pregnant with a man who was not her betrothed. While she awaited judgement under the laws of the Temple, she was visited by a messenger unknown to
any of the vale. By this messenger’s words, it became clear he spoke with the voice of God; not the god of Vindammar, but the one who created them, Aeladh. The servant of Aeladh told her she would bear a son, and that son would be the Prophet of Aeladh - "He Who Would Bring a Light From the East". In 807, her son, the Prophet was born.
In her days of youth, she raised the boy like any son, keeping his mind on the mortal world, still wary of filling his head with his immortal destiny until he came of age. She wanted a normal life for him, and often took him
to the wilds where the monks, and his father, preferred she would not. It was on a hunting trip to the edge of the Vale, where the River Lys sweeps north and aligns with the Torch stars, that an accident caused the boy, aged only six, to be swept downriver to drown.
The Mother searched ceaselessly but the monks were furious and brought her to their Temple. When they returned to the Vale, she was rebuked by her husband, who disowned her for the death of his son. The monks, wary of her standing as a holy figure, banished her to the barren hillsides at the edge of the Vale. Here, she lived out a meagre existence, farming such crops that could be grown on the hillside and trading her crafts with passing merchants.
Beyond the Vale, the rule of the Meargha grew more oppressive as the tales of An B’Aelathil persisted. The rule of Ulla Conir was threatened by the prophesy in that text, and its popularity slowly grew, well-hidden, to the cities, where their court advisors began to treat it seriously. As the years rolled on, the fearsome hooded riders reappeared across the land. They put innocent villagers to the sword and whole hamlets to the torch in
their search for the whispered Red Monastery.
The monks of the Muhr-in-nRos soon became aware of the terror beyond the valley. Their faith was shaken by the loss of the Prophet, and they sent a messenger across the Eireadh Ros to seek aid. The glorious era of Carcaddis had long-since passed ere the days of Braedan, replaced instead with petty, warring lords and greedy chieftains. It was long-removed from the glory of the elves who once dwelt there in tree-covered cities of white stone. These warlords were all of a kind; whose loyalty and wealth came not from statecraft but from plundering their ancestors' ruins and spoils from infighting. There was little that might be trusted in any of them to bring betterment to the people of Heath, let alone defeat an Ullan army in the field.
The monks returned with news of a warlord known among his people as Men-i-Rauth. The name meant, in the Heath dialects, ‘King of Light’. That eastern title gave the monks some hope, and they searched for a willing emissary to speak with this warlord. As they were often known to behead emissaries or torture them in search of powerful artifacts, the monks required a volunteer who might be expected never to return. At the behest of several cowardly monks of the order, they asked the Mother hermit at the edge of the Vale, now a middle-aged woman, if she would restore her standing in the village by meeting with the warlord. Fearlessly, she accepted, and in 833CR, her ship sailed up the Eireadh Ros from the misty shores of the Red Marsh and landed where the hills meet the sea at sunrise one week later.
As the party landed, they were betrayed and ambushed by Meargha spies. Only the Mother and her handmaiden survived to escape to the foothills. Here, she met Men-i-Rauth’s outriders, and was taken to his castle. When she was presented to the warlord’s court, they made fun of her appearance and impoverished state, joking about what joy a grey-haired woman from a swamp could offer their lord. As she waited with dignity, her handmaiden asked why she had come on this journey. This was the Mother’s Revelation:
'When she awaited her death at the court of the barbarians, the Mother was asked why
she had chosen such a fate.' She replied, “because I was bidden to, child;” “Not lonesome was my life as an exile on the hillsides. He whom I loved was with
me; the father of my child; he who foretold of the prophet.”
“I knew of this day, handmaiden, for upon that hillside I dwelt with Aeladh.”
The Mother was escorted to the lord’s audience chamber. In his great hall, she was scorned by members of the court as a petty beggar, come to ask for aid with nothing to give in return. Men-i-Rauth, the heralds announced, had survived an upbringing of forest beasts; he was a man not born of mortals, but raised wild by nature, who slew his father, the previous petty-king, to bring glory to this clan. But the Mother laughed at their claims when she set her eyes on their ‘Men-i-Rauth’. She drew the ire of courtly guards and advisors as she mocked his lineage, and the claims to be raised by
beasts. Because before her she recognised the boy she raised herself. Truly, there was nothing she could offer this great lord, nothing apart from the mother he had lost. Men-i-Rauth removed his crown, set it aside, and embraced his mother. The Prophet, and the Prophesy, was restored. Men-i-Rauth dispatched his mother’s handmaiden in secret with men to protect her, to send word that he lived, and pledged his protection to the Vale of the Red Marsh when time would allow him to fulfill such an oath.
The King in the East
By summer of 834CR, the court of Men-i-Rauth was visited by monks from the Muhr-i-nRos, who conveyed to him the wisdom of the Temple, and the knowledge of Vitar II. The Mother guided diplomacy with rival warlords, using the monks to promote his claim as a unifying king. Lore were given to bitter enemies in return for allegiance, allowing Men-i-Rauth to conquer those rivals with whom he could not make peace. Victory, and his rise to greater power, attracted the attention of other wise and learned people to aid this new ruler.
Men-i-Rauth travelled to Carcaddis in 836CR and entered the city as their king. He refused to receive sacred rites from the Vindammari clerics of Sengil, instead vowing to receive his blessing from the God who still spoke his name in Heath. He was well-educated in the history that recalled their escape from Sengil as the people needed them.
In 837CR, the Mother was injured by an Ullan assassin’s blade at the royal palace at Carcaddis. The poisoned wound was relieved only by a poultice of Ommerage and Piper Aravat, hence the use of those ingredients in healing rituals to this day. The king
decreed this to be an act of war by the Meargha Brothers, and pledged to retaliate.
In 839CR, the invasion ships and shipyards were sabotaged. Days later, a messenger from Muhr-i-nRos arrived with news that an Ullan fleet had taken to the seas to defend the Sedeburg shores. With no ships, the attack was impossible. The messenger also recited the words of An B’Aelathil, reminding the king of the prophesy that ‘He would trust the smallfolk to carry him to victory.’ The king surveyed the channel at Muhr-i-nRos, and its mists that rolled across the channel, whom only the fishermen knew to traverse. In fulfilment of that prophesy, the army of Men-i-Rauth was ferried across the Eireadh Ros by the fishermen of the vale. For whilst the clerics and monks were held in great standing by the villagers and vale-folk, the fishermen plied a meagre trade, forbidden to pass beyond the mists that kept the Muhr-i-nRos a secret. And so, the King in the East and the Hermit Mother, by the works of these smallfolk, returned to the Temple of the Red Marsh.
The Light From the East
The Temple of the Red Marsh could not feed an army. The miracle of the fish and weeds took place one week after the army landed ashore. Since the fishermen had spent all week carrying soldiers, no food was left to feed them. And so he sent word to King Men-i-Rauth, who gathered his captains together. Abbot Irmire bade the King ask Aeladh for guidance, and as the King and his captains looked out to sea they saw it swell, and fish began to land ashore on their own. The weeds they landed in took on an appearance of bountiful greens, which the monks and villagers mixed with the fish to produce a broth of great sustenance. With such blessings from Aeladh, truly god of both land and sea, the army was fed. Men-i-Rauth's Carcaddi followers, skeptical of his destiny, saw as a sign of prophetic fulfilment.
The King broke out of the shelter of the valley and went north with his army, taking monks from the abbey, who could openly spread word that the Light from the East had arrived. Many locals, who had turned to the whispered word of An B’Aelathil eagerly flocked to his banner and lords who would not recognise him fled to the west with their Ullan supporters. Soon, the complexion of the eastern army changed to feature many Heathmen in its ranks.
The Meargha brothers found Men-i-Rauth impossible to stop, with few of their loyal lords willing or able to form a cohesive defence. The muster at the Tor of Egel gathered a large force of Ullan loyalists, stiffened by the hooded riders. They met Men-i-Rauth’s host at the edge of the Adhmad Mirrath - The Shining Lake' - in the summer of 840CR. Despite the loyalists’ better training and equipment, the spirit of the Heathmen won the day. The Ullan loyalists were routed, and the north and east of the countryside came under Men-i-Rauth’s control.
The Ardent Flame at Melan's Ford
The Brothers Meargha fled back to Egel, but their days of autocratic rule were over; an emissary from Conir arrived with news that a force had been dispatched to intervene, by sea, to the south. A fleet of ships was on
its way to retake Sengil, and flank the Heathmen. The Ullan king ordered a force be assembled to close the trap. And here, the wide-ranging conquests of Connobar bore fruit as the emissary explained that a force of northmen had been dispatched from the loyal provinces near Huom Harmann. The terrifying, loyal, berserk tribes would drive a horde of refugees towards Sengil, disrupting the Heath advance.
Men-i-Rauth was trapped. His only chance of survival was to escape with a small retinue along the coast to the east. The people of Sengil begged the king to remain. They bore for him a mark of their faith - a banner of finest brocade. The banner depicted the ancient Ardent Flame, the lost flame of Aeladh, kept safe from the fall of Vindammar. The King recognised
the importance of the moment. He called for a cleric, and declared his faith in
Aeladh and Aeladh alone. The following morning, in Plow-
tide of 842CR, he arrayed his host and had the clerics anoint the men one by one.
When this was complete, the king went before his men and kneeled before the high cleric of the Muhr-i-nRos temple, where he was declared a messenger of God and given the name Aegas, Herald of Aeladh. The banner was raised over the completed ceremony. The new King Aegas declared the foundation of the church of Aeladh, and before his army he struck an accord with God that his lands would only be consecrated to Aeladh. This, he declared, was the new covenant between men and god.
The following evening, a fey mist rolled across the farmlands on which the Heath army was camped, obscuring everything beyond. During the night, scouts were found dead on the edgges of the mist. The camp of Heathmen seemed surrounded, and men blamed the return of Ullan mystics for their ill turn of fortune. To the surprise of many, king Aegas awoke early, still in darkness, and when he saw the mist he roused his men to prepare for battle. And at the break of dawn, the hot sun rose in the east, burning away the mist to reveal a portion of the Ullan force attempting to take the camp unawares. But now it was exposed and isolated. The Heathmen set among them and routed. The Heath army used the same mist to approach the ford, where the main Ullan force was readying, in secret. The mist still lay heavily around the ford of the Melan’s farm, lower in the valley. When morning turned to midday, the mist burned away to reveal Aegas’ men to the unprepared horde of the Ulla Conir. The men of Heath grasped the moment, and bore down ruthlessly on their age-old foes. The men of Heath fought with fanatical vigour, resulting in a crushing defeat for the Ulla Conir leaders, and the slaughter of the Meargha Brothers.
On the field of victory, King Aegas offered terms of peace to the defeated lords and knights in return for the fealty to his crown and to the faith of his new Covenant.
The Aegir Kingdom
Melan's Ford marked the end of Ullan rule in Heath, and soon thereafter in Egel. Smaller battles over the course of the 842-845CR won lands south of the Pass of Uren, which formed the northern extent of his kingdom, and of the northern limit of Covenant influence.
The Council of Awen (860CR)
Within ten years of taking the throne at the Tor of Egel, king Aegas reformed the realm and established a series of walled towns to protect against future attacks. Administration of his church, which was grew swiftly as peace returned to the kingdom proved more difficult for the Prophet of Aeladh.
Conversion from the old Vindamarri faiths proved troublesome, notably in the rural hinterlands, where adherents to the ways of the old gods had escaped the purges of the Meargha. Their prayers to Vorenus, Djan-Rai, and Vandharro seemed to have protected them, so they saw no salvation in the church of Aeladh. In fact, they saw in Aegas the same fervent fanaticism that made the Ulla so dangerous, and refused to pay homage to him until his church relented. For his part, Aegas saw the political danger of allowing cracks to form between his military and religious rule. If he couldn’t maintain the support of the church, it would cast into doubt his status as Aeladh's prophet and his divine appointment to rule. And trouble would reappear if the kingdom could not unite behind his church. Rival magnates assembled knights eager to gain his favour by engaging the hinterland heretics in battle. A crisis was looming.
In the summer of 860CR, Aegas' inner council were split on how to deal with the rural nobility, with many advocating armed enforcement. The eastern, Carcaddi side of his court bristled at the challenge to his leadership; they had forces ready to strike the heretics at the king's command. But this risked the unity of Aegas' army, as many hailed from similarly rural areas. The nobility was watching carefully to see what kind of king Aegas would be.
Aegas' mother advocated a less-risky approach. She summoned the clerics of the realm, both Covenant and unconverted, to the ancient ruins at Awen, where Elves first learned to speak with the spirits. Here, the Elves learned that the spirits were messengers from Aeladh, not gods. The symbolism was not lost on the attendees.
To describe discussions as merely theological would be naive. Lords from across the realms ruled through
the legitimacy of the church. They each put pressure on their clerics, fearing rivals who backed the opposite position to usurp their claims. For their part, the royal advisors tried to craft theological compromises that would bring the rival churches together. Central to this was the question of conflicting homage: could the faithful of Aeladh offer homage to a lord who did not offer religious fealty to Aeladh's appointed king? Did the king have power over the church? Such a contentious question risked the power of the throne.
The answer was theological, practical and political. A senior cleric was made chief advisor to the king, drawn from a council that represented all sections of the faith. This senior cleric was named the Awensere. The Awensere advised the king on matters of faith, and recognised the position of old Vindamarri gods as Divines. Power over the church rested with Aeladh's appointed king, but with the advice of the Awensere. Clerics of old faiths were happy to recognise their patrons under new names, and recognise the lordship of Aeladh in the same way their people now recognised the rule of Aegas but pledged fealty to their local lords. It legitimised the feudal arrangements, the power of the church, the old faiths, and the king.
And so, in the spring of 861, the churches of Aldain, Djan-Rai, Vorenus, and others, threw open their doors so that everyone could worship Aeladh through all of his creations. They became Aeladh's divine aspects, named for the part of his power they represented - The Knight, The Magister, and The Watchman and more. A new age of peace and faith began as rich and powerful adherents commissioned works of art dedicated to Aeladh. The church was unified. But a new crisis loomed.
The Betrayal
The first Awensere was nominated by the Mother. By placing herself central to the discussions of faith, the Mother earned great admiration from the faithful. But she earned as much enmity from those jealous of her position among the faithful.
The family with whom Men-i-Rauth was brought up led those who feared her power. They viewed her as a peasant who almost lost her son, and only through luck became a queen mother. It was the people of Carcaddi hinterlands who had raised him to a man, and by rights it should be they who assume the positions of authority alongside his undisputed rule. They had supported his claim as Prophet, his rule as king, and now his supremacy over the church. They had remained in the background and now wanted their rewards. They had assumed the post of Awensere would fall to one of them, but now saw no route to retain their power.
As the Mother travelled back from the Council of Awen, her cavalcade was ambushed by assassins. They slew her, without leaving a trace behind. A darkness descended on the road to Awen, and onlookers watched as the Mother's corpse was consumed by flame. The mortal whom Aeladh chose as his companion, the mother of his Prophet, was dead. This is known as the Third Sin.
The Failing of the Light
Immediately, the Patriarch of Sengil accused the Carcaddi of her murder, and launched a purge of their churches. Hundreds perished at the hands of Covenant inquisitors in the weeks that followed. The outcome feared by many in the Council of Awen had come to pass,but tempers ran high and nobody was moved to protect worshippers at the fringes of the church.
Worse was to come. A tremor rippled through the Othmael Isles, causing the dome of the Sengi Basilica to crack and collapse which extinguished it's sacred pyre and killed the Patriarch. No amount of magic or prayer would relight the pyre. Aegas summoned his Awensere to understand this sign, but his augurs went without a response. The sign from the heavens was clear: Aeladh had turned from his people.
The implications were serious. The sins of elvenkind and Vindammar depicted a clear path to damnation. In this dark hour Aeladh required a sign of faith. So the Awensere excommunicated the Carcaddi families who were blamed for the assassination, whilst at the same time declaring a crusade in the name of Aeladh. The quest was for the original ashes of the Ardent
Flame, lost centuries earlier by the fleeing clerics of Vindammar. Carcaddi who accepted the quest would be spared their lands and titles. The crusade would cleanse the sin of the Mother's murder, and restore the ancient flame borne out of the east, a spark of Aeladh's light that birthed the mortal and immortal worlds. Dozens of Carcaddi nobles accepted the quest, sailing for the ruins of Tarken Onham to pick up the trail. But Aegas' Carcaddi family disowned their son, and returned in scorn to their lands, ever the foes of the Awensere and the Covenant.
The King Turns Inwards
In response to the murder, the royal court placed powerful wards about the king. Men and women, deemed incorruptible by the Awensere, formed a retinue around the king, and were dubbed knight-companions of the Allegiant Guard.
The Awensere advised that the people, bereft of the Mother, required a symbol to connect the church and the king. The banner of the Ardent Flame, carried into battle at Melan's Ford and then flown over the Basilica at Sengil, was remade into a cloak worn by the king. The finest mages in the land and the purest of clerics worked it into a garment of mortal defence; no blade would pass it, and no work of magic defy it.
The church, at the behest of the peasantry began to authorise worship of the Mother alongside the other Divines. In 867CR, Following a council at Sengil, the Serimot elevated the Mother to her current place among the Divines, and appointed, alongside the Awensere, the Ossere and Aldsere which would form the upper hierarchy of the Covenant.
The Fall of the Aegir
King Aegas had four sons, Balian, Bryndan, Ellard and Urossa. He lived over 120 years, to an age other men could not; more evidence of his divine inheritance. He married twice; firstly to the princess of Egel to secure the Egellant throne and, when he outlived her, to the daughter of High King Manus of Allsond to repair the feud with his Carcaddi family.
In 930CR, the king was confronted by his family over
matters of inheritance. Balian, his eldest son from his first marriage, was to be named successor, much to the dismay of his Carcaddi son from the later marriage, Urossa.
The matter came to a head as Balian was inducted into the Allegiant by Awensere Eadan, against the wishes of the Carcaddi queen. She demanded her son be inducted too, fearing his safety at the hands of an anointed successor with military backing. As a compromise, old Aegas agreed to induct all four sons, and settle their inheritance at the same time. Urossa, went first and, to his dismay, received the earldom of the dangerous Vanna Reach instead of rich farmland. After the others were anointed, Urossa toasted their inheritance with Aegas. This made the old man proud, and he toasted his sons as perfect princes to run the kingdom when he departed. But as he drank, he stumbled, clutching his throat and lips. Urossa disarmed the old king of his dubbing blade, slew Balian with it, and fled from the palace with his mother. The old king, saviour of the North, unifier of the church, and Prophet of Aeladh, died of poison before his throne, still wrapped in the cloak of the Ardent Flame.
Civil war erupted as the three remaining sons took to the field to win the crown. The war was bitter, and cost the realm many great nobles who might have kept the kingdom whole for the victor. The people of Heath suffered more than most, as armies stripped the land bare of fighting men and food to feed them. The nobles of central and eastern Heath refused to take part in the war, and united under the marcher Earl Urien Snowborne in opposition to the warring brothers. They would later, in the remaining months of 939, elevate Urien to be the King of Heath, and offered fealty to him instead of the king at Egel.
In 933CR, the middle son, Ellard Aegasson ‘the Calm’, captured the crown of Egel after Bryndan was slain and Urossa defeated and executed. But the old Aegir kingdom was fractured beyond reunification. He sired no sons, and in 957 his daughter Vivienne married the powerful magnate Ianis Ceirwynn to unify the crown of Egel and the banner of the Hart. It was hence known by this name to this day.
During this time, the Covenant aligned with Ellard and Bryndan, but clerics were forbidden to take up arms in the service of either Urossa or the elder brothers. Strict neutrality was observed. As refugees fled and manors declined, the peasants who survived found the Covenant clerks to be able administrators. As nobles went to war, much of the countryside were left hands of clerics. They brought stability, and helped their lands evade the worst atrocities.
The great works of state undertaken by Aegas – the royal highways, coastal fortresses, royal ministries, and the royal mint, all crumbled under the pressure of a decade of warfare. It damaged all the major centres of administration in the kingdom, and in this age of strife, the people looked to the church for aid and succour. In the absence of a king, the Covenant shepherded people through the war, and when war was done, the Covenant remained intact to unite the people where kings could not. The Covenant ended the strife of 930-940CR as the backbone of the feudal regime.
The Covenant Spreads
Long before the treachery of Aegas' son, missionaries from Muhr-i-nRos ventured far and wide to spread the news of the return of Aeladh and the new Covenant between God and his people. The war saw many of the faithful flee abroad to escape conflict.
By 970CR, the Lord of the Isles at Garrig-Alu permitted a secluded monastery be established for Aeladh in the name of the Bosun, on secluded Fearlim. When the Lord of the Isles formally converted in 988CR, and made the Covenant the official religious practice of the island, it became the seat of the Covenant in the Othmael archiplelago. The Fearlim monastery continues to be a centre of religious knowledge to this day, and is the seat of an influential Aldsere.
The northern shores of Forodain still carried the taint of the Ulla Conir. Its inhabitants looked warily out to the north, and the kin of Ullan invaders still ruled over towns and villages across the coast of northern Hart. An army of knights under the command of the Allegiant struck north and reconsecrated these lands to Aeladh, although dark cults still persist to this day. The northern tribes around the Vanna and beyond the Emain Mor
proved resilient to conversion; berserkers of the north would have been eager to earn their place in the afterlife against knights of a southerm god. Instead, from 990, merchants brought gifts from the Covenant which found their way to the jarls, who adorned themselves with the beads of the Mother, the weapons of the Knight, or the armour of the Wright. It wasn't surprising when, in 1055CR, King Harkkon Ironhide was blessed with blood in honour of The Exile. Their god of war was recognised as a part of the same Divine, and his lands knelt before the Ardent Flame of Aeladh at last.
The power of the church was attractive to kings across the north. They feared vassalage to a Covenant-backed King of the Hart, Heath, or the Isles, so pledged to Aeladh and offered lands, titles, and riches in return for influence against their rivals. This enriched the coffers of the Awensere and provoked the concern of its faithful kingdoms as more of their lands passed to clerics, not their earls, lords, and knights. In response, the 1168 Allegiant Council restored Covenant fiefs in Heath to the direct control of the king. Despite the machinations of the Red Temple, they could not match the military power of the king, nor the lords to whom the lands were eventually restored. The Edict also firmly restated the supremacy of the king in matters temporal, including the payment and raising of taxes; and it restated the authority of the Awensere over matters spiritual, including tithes to the church.
The Present Day
The Covenant has become embedded in rural, civic, and noble societies in Forodain. It guides the law, social behaviour, and morality during peacetime, as well as the conduct and legitimacy of war. Its clerics conduct marriages among all classes, from king and earl down to villeins and slaves. Its high clerics arbitrate disuptes, and the Awensere is the guarantor of peace between many kings of the north.
In 1384, King Ulric of Heath died without an heir, and the rival claims of Duke Howland and the king's nephew Edric tore the land apart in a bitter civil strife. The kidnap of the young prince sparked popular revolt, which was supported by the highland lords and some within the church. But the Covenant preached its neutrality, despite Ulric's confiscation of funds from the abbeys in lean times. The peasantry loved their deceased liege, who put his love for his wife Marynne above her duty to sire an heir. He took no concubine, and would not remarry. The people adored this devotion and were outraged at the actions of Howland. He struggled to maintain his forces in the face of hostile manors, and his campaign quickly flagged. Edric was rescued before he could be executed by the Duke, and received the support of the church prior to his annointment in 1388.
As Howland regrouped and his forces retired to their farms for the harvest, they discovered raiding bands of orcs across the south. These warbands seemed, at first, simply a nuisance, until the extent of their numbers became known. Young King Edric II mobilised a winter army and struck deep into Howland's domain to finally defeat him on home ground. Howland fled into exile rather than suffer execution, allowing Edric's army to return home to repel the orc forces gathering in the south. But the situation was more grave than anyone expected.
In 1389, the Black Hand banner, and the pennants of the Fly were sighted amidst a host of orcs and men that marched into central Heath. This horde devastated the land, feasting on the new harvest and driving starving refugees before them. Clerics of the Corruptor blighted the land wherever they went, defiling the holy places, and drawing the dead from their tombs. Plague came after, and stalled Edric's efforts to raise an army to halt their progress. When his forces gathered in the field, it faced a host many times its size, swollen with creatures from the hidden deeps of the world enticed by Baalphegor to stray into the light. It was hopeless for Heath, and only the constant northward march of the Kainan army forstalled complete defeat on the battlefield.
Clerics of The Scholar identified the lord of the host as Baalphegor's finest half-orc general. This news spurred an alliance between Heath and the reclusive Vallasaari clans, and soon prompted the Hart and Anglass to send men. Even the dwarves, whom many had forsaken, sent proud clansmen of Thorin Heyerdahl. A year later, with its lands and coffers drained, the alliance trapped the Kainan host in a valley. The once-beautiful valley, inhabited by both men and Vallasaari, was turned to a hostile wasteland, akin to ruined Vindammar. King Edric's army of Heathmen, Anglesse, Heyerdahlen, and Hartlanders, routed the orcs and scattered them into the hills. Their warlord was nowhere to be found.
Many soldiers returned home in the autumn of with fatal ailments. The king himself suffered. The Honorable Ossere of Wikkensmeade led the victorious army home in early 1391, as the king remained behind for treatment. When he did return to the palace, he was not himself; his warm smile had dulled, his laughter ceased, and eventually he retreated from public appearances altogether.
The land of Heath remains badly disfigured by both Howland's campaign and the Kainan invasion. Even lands that avoided the Kainan blight now suffer to repay the crown's debt to Anglass and Hart. Lords raise taxes and commoners must choose between losing their lands or losing their families. Meanwhile, their liege lords look to the palace and plead for soldiers to keep their manors safe, whilst others use the king's absence to settle old scores and plunder rival lords' lands.
The current political situation in Heath is treacherous for the Awensere. The Allegiant Council explicitly forbade church rule over the temporal kingdom. However, King Edric's withdrawal and illness left a power vacuum in Wikkensmeade. Rival claimants promote ambitious offspring to take the throne and solve the crisis. But these are vain and cruel lords, reliant on mercenaries for their power, and unknown sources of wealth to pay them. In their hands the kingdom would suffer. And the long-siffering people would not sit idly by whilst their legitimate ruler, leader, and war-hero, is deposed.
And so, by the present day of 1422CR, the Covenant sits in the midst of a delicate balance of competing powers. If war looms, the Covenant will do all it can to forestall it, lest the war-weary people, and the kindgom itself, fall in the conflict. ⛭
